My complaints about this book are minor; moreover, I am not certain that
all of them are entirely justified. I am confident, however, that ElizabethGrosz has made a superb and timely intervention into three interwovenphilosophies of the untimely.
William E. Connolly
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
Note
1. Brian Goodwin, How the Leopard Changed Its Spots (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2001), 106.
Politics and Vision: Continuity and Innovation in Western Political
Thought by Sheldon S. Wolin. Expanded edition. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton Unive rsity Press, 2004. 784 pp. $39.95 (cloth).
DOI: 10.1177/0090591706290521
When it first appeared in 1960, Politics and Vision had an extraordinarily
important impact on the development of political philosophy in the UnitedStates. The book inspired a generation of students, many of whom werelater instrumental in reinvigorating the field at the time when it was underassault by those who subscribe to the scientific study of politics. Forty-fouryears later, Politics and Vision has been reissued in expanded form, now
split into two parts, the former reproducing the original without change, andthe latter comprising some 214 pages of new text. The new volume pro-vides us with a remarkable window on the intellectual evolution of one ofAmerica’s pre-eminent political thinkers. 
Time has been kind to what is now Part One of Politics and Vision . Many
years after having cribbed liberally from it for my first lectures, I find itretains the freshness, subtlety, and extraordinary wisdom I found in a bookthen already twenty-five years old. Sheldon Wolin’s judgments about thenature and vocation of political philosophy remain the most cogent we have:
The ideas and concepts that have been refined over the centuries ought not to
be viewed as a fund of absolute political wisdom, but rather as a continuouslyevolving grammar and vocabulary to facilitate communication and to orientthe understanding. (p. 26)Books in Review 667
The object of understanding and communication is “the political” dimen-
sion of human existence—not order, wealth, truth, or morality, at least notin the first instance. Wolin’s definition is precise: politics is
(a) a form of activity centering around the quest for competitive advantage
between groups, individuals, or societies; (b) a form of activity conditionedby the fact that it occurs within a situation of change and relative scarcity;(c) a form of activity in which the pursuit of advantage produces consequencesof such magnitude that they affect in a significant way the whole society ora substantial portion of it. (p. 11)
Ideally, humans respond to politics by judging and acting in common to
meet its challenges. Under these conditions, humans produce commonjudgments that cannot be measured by external standards, whether those ofa moral order or of a scientifically knowable reality.
What makes a thinker worthy of interpretation is that they either had
insight into the political or had a hand in translating it into some other kindof reality. The great thinkers often did both. Accordingly, we are treated togenerous but critical accounts of Plato and Aristotle, the Romans, themedieval Christian thinkers, Machiavelli, Luther, Calvin, and Hobbes.Each sought to capture the nature of the political, even if writing in theterms of another discourse, such as that of ethics or theology. In contrast,modern and contemporary political discourse has suppressed “the politi-cal.” Wolin locates the erosion of the political in rise of “the social”—thediscovery of the economy, society, and social groups as self-organizingorders, no longer in need of common guidance. Social science emerges asan accomplice, often taken by the modern enthusiasm for administered soci-eties, modeled on the advances of the sciences. From the French reactionar-ies de Maistre and de Bonald; through Marx, Tocqueville, and Durkheim;and to modern heirs in organizational sociology and political science,society is increasingly portrayed as a complex, plural, self-organizingobject of knowledge, made up of autonomous mechanisms and groupswith no need for the common guidance of its citizens (ch. 10). For its part,the liberal tradition valorized private goods and judged commonality to bea burden if not an outright threat. Wolin’s interpretations in Part One areexercises in recovery: traditional political thought had always insistedupon the general identity of politics and society and the lesser status of pri-vate and group life—in this way naming, if not always theorizing, thedomain of “the political.” The benefit of this interpretative lens is that itbreathes a new vitality into the canon—so we experience it not just as living,but also as urgently relevant.668 Political Theory
There are, of course, costs to such a sweeping thesis. The generosity Wolin
displays toward a Plato or a Luther—looking for their insights into the politi-cal while identifying the ways they undermine their insights—sometimes failswhen it comes to modern thinkers. Thus, for example, he crowds John StuartMill into the same liberal paradigm as Adam Smith and Jeremy Bentham(pp. 304-5). Indeed, Wolin misses an entire strain of liberalism, originating inKant, which develops a distinctive understanding of public judgment thatcompetes with the privatized, economic strains of liberalism. And in charac-terizing the liberal constitutional tradition, Wolin focuses only on the protec-tive dimensions, failing to comment on constitutional displacements ofpolitical conflict from violence and coercion to the infinitely more politicalmedia of talk, negotiation, bargaining, and voting. There is too what todaylooks like a romantic reaction against modern complexity and diversity. Thedifferentiation of society, with its pluralism of goods and forms of association,and its multiple patterns of allegiance that produce cosmopolitan individuals,is mistaken for fragmented “localism,” whereby the qualities and demands ofcitizenship are met as well as exhausted in group membership (pp. 385-86).As a consequence, Wolin’s concept of “the political” in Part One remains dif-ficult to relate to the contemporary conditions except as critique.
Part Two, published over four decades later, responds to a different
world. The focus on community, commonality, and connection that informedPart One remains, but is complemented by a new focus on power, with amore direct commitment to democracy as a form of participation, the mostpolitical of political forms. The problematic is this: how can “democracy”have become an almost universal ideology, while its most fundamentalmeaning and form, participation in dealing with common problems, isalmost nowhere to be found?
The normative focus is clearer in Part Two, and the diagnosis is dark. From
the perspective of Part One, the “age of organization” could be accused of aconvenient and almost innocent forgetfulness of politics. But it has morphedinto an “inverted totalitarianism,” reproduced by “postmodern power”—power which resides, primarily, in the decentered dominance of capitalism inpartnership with liberal constitutionalism. “Postmodern power” originated inearly modern Baconian fantasies of a world controlled by reason, a vision thatinspired early visions of a scientifically administered society, and later con-joined forces with capitalism (ch. 11). The resulting system of power nolonger has an identifiable locus, as did earlier forms of political sovereignty.The result is an “inverted totalitarianism”: a system of power that is perva-sive, but differs from the older totalitarianism in its relative diffusion, as wellas its depoliticized citizenry. Like the earlier Nazi form, however, it feeds offBooks in Review 669
of a kind of permanent revolution, but now instigated by the needs of the eco-
nomic system. The constant dislocation endemic to the economy, combinedwith post-9/11 control tactics and constant instigation of fear, functions todepoliticize citizens by keeping them focused on security. Unlike the earlierforms, “inverted totalitarianism” makes less use of the directly political orga-nization of terror: now, rather, it consists in a convenient alliance of economicupheaval and elite opportunism. These tendencies have congealed into a newpolitical form that Wolin calls, simply, “Superpower”—a form centered in theUnited States. Within Superpower, institutionalized democracy has all butbeen eclipsed, with representative linkages corrupted, the state respondingprimarily to the demands of the economy and its elite. Democracy is nolonger a characteristic of institutions, elections having become a “continu-ously managed plebiscite” (p. 554), while constitutional arrangements under-write bureaucratic routines. Democracy has become “fugitive”—residing inexperiences of resistance within local venues.
Wolin’s interpretative hand is heavier in Part Two. Whereas Part One
mixes generous, evocative interpretations that make the figures come to lifeand in many ways seem better than they are, in Part Two political thinkers aremore clearly subordinated to the argument. Wolin lines up friends (Marx,Dewey, Tocqueville) and enemies (Nietzsche and postmodern politicalthought, Popper, Rawls). The friends are treated with the earlier critical gen-erosity: his rehabilitation of Marx (ch. 12) is brilliant. Despite his brusheswith Hegelian teleology and scientism, Wolin shows that Marx both appreci-ated the political as the aspect of the human condition that democracy shouldevoke, express, protect, and develop, and understood that the migration ofpower into an economic form had suppressed the political as never before.
In contrast, thinkers identified with postmodern theory and liberalism
have become complicit in “inverted totalitarianism.” In the case of post-modern thinkers, “antipathies toward essentialism, centered discourse,foundationalism, and historical narrative” have
served to disable its theorists from confronting the basic characteristics of
contemporary power-formation s... the cascades of ‘critical theory’ and their
postures of revolt, and the appetite for theoretical novelty, function as supportrather than opposition ....A  system that cannot conceive stopping and
dreads a slowdown has developed its cultural complement in a postmodernsensibility that adores novelty, dreads boredom, and far from operating as a‘fetter’ on capitalism, encourages its rhythms. (p. 567)
It is because of Nietzsche’s iconic status for contemporary postmodern
theorists that Wolin devotes a long chapter to him (ch. 13), reminding us not670 Political Theory
only that Nietzsche originated the view that politics is a war of cultures, but
also that he glorified destruction, power, amoralism, slavery, and apocalypticchange, while seeing democracy, socialism, feminism, and liberalism as deca-dent ideologies of the weak. Nietzsche not only provided plenty of fodder
for Nazi propagandists, but also, more significantly, provided a template forcontemporary “inverted totalitarianism” with its diffuse but universal powerstructure, constant change, and elite control.
Such a thorough subordination of Nietzsche to the case against post-
modern theory—whatever the merits of that case—does not, I think, producea very interesting interpretation. Wolin replays a tactic that is well-honed inNietzsche studies, which is to reduce Nietzsche’s cultural critique andphilosophy to a support structure for his politics. The resulting relativistic,amoral, and contradictory Nietzsche is not credible enough to account forsubsequent theoretical interest. Nietzsche’s role in Wolin’s argument mayaccount for the fact that there is bare mention of Continental fellow travelers.Wolin’s analysis of power, for example, most reminds one of Foucault’s.Likewise, indebted to Nietzsche via Heidegger, Hannah Arendt is scarcelymentioned, despite the clear resemblance of her conception of “the politi-cal” to Wolin’s own.
Wolin’s accounts of the liberalism of Popper and Rawls are somewhat more
generous, although the findings of complicity are pointed. Popper (ch. 14)produced a liberalism in which a rationalism construed on the model ofengineering gets the better of democracy, thus aligning liberalism withtechnocracy. In A Theory of Justice , Rawls depoliticizes actors by imagin-
ing away their substantive characteristics, while assuming that redistri-butions would be effected by a paternalistic welfare state bureaucracy(ch. 15). Political Liberalism , more political in design, focuses upon con-
flict between comprehensive worldviews, thus suppressing attention toconflicts between accumulated powers. Again here, one wishes for theWolin of Part One, where critique leavened by generosity is productive. Forexample, it would not be inconsistent with Wolin’s broader case to admit thatRawls’ legitimate calculation is that mutual recognitions among citizens—these are the moral demands of citizenship not entailed in comprehensiveworldviews—may be a condition of one citizen caring about the empower-ments of another.
Of broader concern, however, are the concepts of inverted totalitarianism
and fugitive democracy themselves. In speaking of Francis Bacon, Wolinwrites that when “theorizing abstracts from the human world, it annihilatessome portion of it and loses the innocence of mathematics.” Had he turnedthis phrase on himself, he might have noticed that theoretical conceptionsBooks in Review 671
of totality, while well-suited for projecting conviction, are also fraught with
dangers of theoretical hubris. Naming the American system as invertedtotalitarianism (and Wolin’s account is very much centered on the post-9/11United States) is a legitimate rhetorical response to self-serving elite claimsthat the United States is “a democracy.” As a theoretical device, however, itcan reify the system, wrestling down contrary indications as merely serving“a positive function in the system” (p. 592). Although Wolin suggests thatfugitive democracy might survive on a combination of traditional localismand postmodern “centrifugalism” (p. 604), this hope, mentioned only in thelast few pages of the book, appears abstract when compared to the assembledevidence for inverted totalitarianism. Wolin says little about new politicalpatterns developing within the last two decades in the United States andelsewhere. These include the rise of social movements, dramatic increasesin the activities of associations and networks, new forms of direct action,increasing use of referendums, a growing use of the courts to press citizeninterests, increased public monitoring of government and corporate activi-ties, and new political uses of communication technologies. Formerly non-democratic institutions are increasingly responding by devolving anddeconcentrating decision making and governance, increasing their use ofstakeholder representation and deliberative policy making, experimentingwith collaborative governance, and increasing transparency. The democra-tic implications of these developments are unclear—no doubt co-option,“soft” controls, ineffectiveness, and self-delusion are all involved. But nodemocratic should subject them to theoretical excision.
Likewise, the concept of fugitive democracy cedes too much of the ter-
ritory of collective rule. Wolin argues in Part Two that democracy is notabout governing, which requires settled forms that are “permanent ratherthan fugitive” (pp. 602-3). “Governing means manning and accommodat-ing to bureaucratized institutions that, ipso facto, are hierarchical in struc-ture and elitist, permanent rather than fugitive—in short, anti-democratic”(pp. 602-3). Wolin applies this judgment not just to administration, but alsoto written constitutions, which tend toward settled forms that are too easilyrendered predictable. In contrast, fugitive democracy is existential innature, experienced in those localized acts of opposition that create andrecreate common political experience (pp. 601, 604).
Granting that democracy can and should draw from the wellspring of
common experiences, reserving the term for such ephemeral momentsremoves critical distinctions from the domain of institutionalized power, asif all routines, rules, constitutions, and governance that function to arrange,distribute, justify, and regularize power are equally “totalitarian.” The strategy672 Political Theory
amounts to a unilateral conceptual disarmament on behalf of an ideal puri-
fied of its contact with power. If there are concepts that would help to dis-tinguish between better and worse institutions (which, although he does notdiscuss them, Wolin would surely devise), it isn’t clear why the concept ofdemocracy should not be among them. Moreover, Wolin underestimates thedemocratic functions of stabilities and securities. Every authoritarian usesunknowable rules and uncertain consequences as tools of pacification. Incontrast, democracies will involve whole ecologies of practices and institu-tional arrangements that balance securities and assurances with engage-ment, and stability with change. Finally, were the concept of democracy tobe disconnected from governing, the result would be a democratic theorythat has given up leveraging the terms of public discourse, which decidedlydo combine “democracy” and “governing.”
This being said, democracy has no greater ally than Sheldon Wolin—the
commitment to its most robust meanings, underpinned by magisterial intel-lect and incisive observation, comes through in every page of his book. IfPart Two is to be taken not as “democratic theory”—that is, as less com-prehensive than its presentation—then we can then receive it in the pro-gressive spirit it was written, as an alarm sounded at a crucial point ofdanger and possibility for democracy.
Mark E. Warren
University of British Columbia, VancouverBooks in Review 673
Copyright of Political Theory is the property of Sage Publications Inc. and its content may not be copied or
emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.
