Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpse20
Psychology & Sexuality
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rpse20
Asexual identity development and internalisation:
a scoping review of quantitative and qualitative
evidence
Sinéad Kelleher, Mike Murphy & Xin Su
To cite this article:  Sinéad Kelleher, Mike Murphy & Xin Su (2023) Asexual identity
development and internalisation: a scoping review of quantitative and qualitative evidence,
Psychology & Sexuality, 14:1, 45-72, DOI: 10.1080/19419899.2022.2057867
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/19419899.2022.2057867
Published online: 03 Apr 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1035
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 

RESEARCH ARTICLE
Asexual identity development and internalisation: a scoping 
review of quantitative and qualitative evidence
Sinéad Kelleher, Mike Murphy
 and Xin Su
School of Applied Psychology, University College Cork, Cork Ireland
ABSTRACT
Individuals who do not experience sexual attraction and adopt an asexual 
identity are the focus of increasing amounts of psychological and socio -
logical research. A scoping review was conducted to identify current 
knowledge of asexuality and components of asexual identity develop -
ment and internalisation that emerge within literature. Findings from 29 
articles were analysed and formed into themes that best describe the key 
events and sense-making processes underlying identity development, 
such as coming-out, the reactions of others and how asexuals interpret 
their identity. These findings indicate that heteronormativity and compul -
sory sexuality play a role in how individuals internalise their asexuality, 
which in turn, shapes their identity development. Despite this, consider -
able gaps in the literature concerning partner relationships, stigmatisa -
tion, isolation and the impact that this has on asexuals’ wellbeing 
continue to exist. Thus, future research should examine the challenges 
faced by asexuals such as identity development within a heteronormative 
and allonormative context and the resources available to ameliorate 
them.ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 19 April 2021  
Accepted 18 March 2022 
KEYWORDS 
asexuality; identity; sexuality; 
internalisation; challenges
Personal identification and philosophical orientation
The authors acknowledge and accept that asexuality is valid and real. This research was conducted 
with the aim to identify current knowledge of asexuality and components of asexual identity 
development and internalisation that emerge within literature. In doing this, we seek to accurately 
and sensitively relay information surrounding asexuality and enrich our understanding of sexuality 
and the philosophy behind sex and sexual attraction. We believe that this research contributes 
towards a growing awareness and understanding of asexuality and may help to reverse myths and 
negative assumptions surrounding asexuality.
We believe that asexual experiences are diverse and accept the common definition of asexuality 
as a lack or absence of sexual attraction. We acknowledge that asexuality is not a behaviour, a form of 
celibacy or sexual desire disorder. We are also aware that many asexual people have romantic 
relationships and may engage in sexual activity. We recognise that the dismissal or stigmatisation 
of asexuality within everyday life may contribute towards psychological distress among asexual 
people and effect their identity development. We believe that our understanding of sex and sexuality 
can be enriched by studying asexuality.
Asexuality as a sexual identity has increased in profile partly due to the emergence of social 
media outlets, the development of the Asexuality Visibility and Education Network (AVEN) and 
a growth in academic attention, beginning with Bogaert’s (2004 ) demographic analysis in which 
a 1% prevalence rate of asexuality was recorded within a British sample (N > 18,000). According 
CONTACT Sinéad Kelleher 
 sinead.kelleher@ucc.ie 
 School of Applied Psychology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY                              
2023, VOL. 14, NO. 1, 45–72 
https://doi.org/10.1080/19419899.2022.2057867
© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 
to Cuthbert (2019 ), asexuality is becomingly increasingly recognised within non-heterosexual 
communities, mainstream media and popular culture. Because of this, asexuality has since been 
the focus of increasing amounts of psychological and sociological research (Mollet & Lackman, 
2018 ).
Definitional issues
According to Laumann et al. (2000 ), researchers’ interest in sexuality can be categorised under three 
separate headings – namely, behaviour, desire and identity. This can include the use of a description- 
based approach to identifying a sexual orientation (i.e. sexual attraction/desire towards individuals of 
the opposite or same sex), a behavioural approach (i.e. a lack of sexual behaviour), as well as self- 
identification. Beginning with Storms’ (1980) two-dimensional model of sexual orientation, academic 
literature has most frequently defined asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction or low sexual desire 
(Bogaert, 2006 ; Brotto & Yule, 2017 ; DeLuzio Chasin, 2011 ). Although this definition is widely used 
within literature (Prause & Graham, 2007 ), it is important to recognise that asexual individuals have 
the potential for sexual arousal, can engage in sexual behaviours and be romantically attracted to 
others (Bogaert, 2006 ). For example, some individuals may identify as asexual but still experience 
sexual attraction or engage in sexual behaviour, while others may define their asexuality through 
abstinence from sexual intercourse (Poston & Baumle, 2010 ). This in turn, indicates that asexuality 
may exist along a spectrum, with many asexual individuals experiencing varying levels of sexual 
attraction and varying attitudes towards sexual activity (Hammack et al., 2019 ). Moreover, when 
defining asexuality within research, there is increasing interest in the role of sexual and romantic 
dimensions among participants (Scherrer, 2008 ). Therefore, all criteria used to identify asexuality 
within research will be accepted as relevant for the purpose of this review. This will better map the 
use of a focused definition within research.
The scope of current research
Research into the area of asexuality has evolved following Bogaert’s (2004 ) initial study, with an 
increasing focus on the experience of being asexual and associated psychological characteristics. 
Prause and Graham (2007 ) initiated such investigation, through the comparison of both sexual and 
self-identified asexual individuals and the features that distinguished both groups. Through this 
investigation, Prause and Graham (2007 ) characterised asexuality as a lack of sexual desire directed 
towards others, with many participants reporting few to no sexual experiences. Their findings 
prompted the development of further investigation that focused on the lived experiences of asexual 
participants, and how this may allow us to better understand and define asexuality. In light of this, 
research has focused largely on characteristics associated with asexuality, with some indicating 
similarities between asexuality and other sexual minority identities (Scherrer, 2008 ). Specifically, 
such investigations have focused on aspects of asexuality such as commonalities within the com -
munity (Carrigan, 2011 ), coming-out processes (Robbins et al., 2016 ) and experiences of stigmatisa -
tion and polarisation (Chasin, 2015 ). Through this, research has shown a higher prevalence of 
interpersonal problems and mental health difficulties associated with asexual individuals (Yule 
et al., 2013 ), with many attributing this to the effects of discrimination and negative coming-out 
experiences (Lucassen et al., 2011 ). For example, MacInnis and Hodson (2012 , p. 738), reported anti- 
asexual bias held towards asexuals that was ‘equivalent to, or even more extreme, than bias held 
towards homosexuals and bisexuals’. These negative sentiments held towards asexuality and a lack 
of acceptance from family, friends and professional misunderstandings (Chasin, 2015 ), appear to 
influence asexuals’ self-concepts and the development of their asexual identities (McInroy et al., 
2020 ). Thus, the process of integrating or internalising these sentiments into one’s own self-concept 
is becoming increasingly studied among asexual individuals (Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 ; Mollet, 
2020 ; Scherrer, 2008 ).46
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Identity development
According to Keniston (1968 ) and Marcia (1987 ), identity is a personally and socially meaningful 
sense of one’s goals, beliefs, values and life roles, that is both organised and learned. Identity 
development is considered a critical psychosocial task across the lifespan (Keniston, 1968 ; McLean, 
Syed, McAdams et al., 2015 ) and is a constructed story of how an individual comes to be who they 
currently are (McAdams & McLean, 2013 ). Identity is believed to develop at both intrapersonal and 
interpersonal levels and comprises of individual, relational and collective identities that interact with 
each other (Vignoles et al., 2011 ). Specifically, identity development may be considered the con-
struction of an individuals’ self-conceptualisation (Sharma & Sharma, 2010 ) that is influenced by both 
cultural and societal factors (Misra, 2007 ), and is largely studied to determine well-being (Thoits, 
2013 ).
Although identity development is considered to manifest during childhood and early adoles -
cence (McLean, Syed, Fivush et al., 2015 ) it continues to develop and grow across adulthood and into 
old age (Kroger, 2015 ). Thus, the development of an individual’s identity can be considered an 
important lifelong process. According to Stryker (1980 ), identity involves the integration of ‘blocks’ 
which together, build a unified self-concept that enables a person to function with coherence. As 
such, the development of a positive and well understood identity involves building self-esteem, 
exploring self-definition, reducing self-discrepancies and fostering role formation and achievement 
(Tsang et al., 2012 ). Because of this, research is becoming increasingly concerned with recognising 
the complex and multifaceted nature of sexual identity development among sexual-minority indi-
viduals and specifically, asexual individuals (Morgan, 2013 ).
Asexual identity development
Sexuality is considered an aspect of one’s identity that can shape their entire character (Kietzer, 2015 ) 
and is believed to be affected by both internal and external factors (Mayer et al., 2014 ). Sexual 
identity can be conceptualised as involving the cognitive and emotional understanding of an 
individual’s sexuality, including sexual attractions, desires, behaviours, values and relationships 
(Morgan, 2013 ; Savin-Williams, 2011 ). This understanding assists in forming a personally and socially 
meaningful sense of one’s sexual identity (Morgan, 2013 ) and involves negotiating feelings of 
instability and transitions, as well as heightened self-focus and identity exploration (Arnett, 2007 ). 
However, while sexual identity development for non-heterosexual individuals can be an opportunity 
for exploration and self-discovery, it can simultaneously be inhibited or contrived (Torkelson, 2012 ).
The development of an individual’s sexual minority identity typically involves a process of 
becoming aware of themselves as different from their peers, identifying with an orientation that 
corresponds with their sexual and romantic attractions and disclosing their sexuality to others (Savin- 
Williams & Diamond, 2000 ). According to Cass's (1979 ) Theory of Sexual Identity Formation, identity 
development among non-heterosexual individuals involves a process of questioning and becoming 
aware of one’s sexuality, exploring that emerging identity and engaging in non-heterosexual related 
social and sexual activities (Cass, 1979 ). This process is believed to take time as individuals engage in 
self-questioning, experimentation and conflict (Rosario et al., 2006 ). The resulting identity integration 
is portrayed through both embracing and disclosing a non-heterosexual identity (Rosario et al., 
2006 ). Despite the ongoing relevance of Cass's (1979 ) model, there is emerging evidence to suggest 
that sexual identity development does not follow a consistent route and is not stable from person to 
person (Morgan, 2013 ). Specifically, recent efforts have been made to account for the complex and 
dynamic nature of sexual identity to include a multidimensional model that operates at both an 
individual and societal level (Dillon et al., 2011 ).
Research suggests that there are many components specific to the development of an asexual 
identity that differ from the trajectory witnessed among other non-heterosexual groups (McInroy 
et al., 2020 ). For example, Robbins et al. (2016 ) proposed a model of identity development that PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 47
contains experiences unique to asexual individuals. Within this model they suggest that a lack of 
information causes many asexuals to initially question the legitimacy of their asexuality and patho -
logise their lack of sexual attraction. Moreover, the discovery of an asexual identity is considered 
a unique process within this model as asexual individuals typically gain information through online 
resources and asexuality-specific communities. Finally, disclosure is considered a crucial element 
within this model as external validation and the opportunity to educate others facilitates identity 
integration (Robbins et al., 2016 ). Interestingly, when investigating asexual identity formation, Winer 
et al. (2022 ), found that approximately half of asexual individuals adopt other sexual identities earlier 
in their lives. In this respect, bisexuality and pansexuality may function as ‘identity pathways’ for 
many asexual individuals prior to the discovery of an asexual identity (Winer et al., 2022 ). Similar to 
the invisible nature of asexuality identified within previous models of identity development (Robbins 
et al., 2016 ), limited awareness of asexuality may cause many individuals to initially adopt a sexual 
identity that is more recognisable (Winer et al., 2022 ).
Asexual identity development and wellbeing
Sexual identity distress has been shown to significantly predict psychological distress among non- 
heterosexual individuals (Wright & Perry, 2006 ). Specifically, anti-queer attitudes and heterosexism, 
can result in difficulties such as social rejection, isolation and discrimination which in turn, can 
negatively affect their sexual identity development (Anderson, 2020 ; Craig et al., 2017 ; Mayer et al., 
2014 ). Moreover, marginalisation as a result of sexual identity can lead to higher rates of suicidality 
and suicidal ideation (Di Giacomo et al., 2018 ), mental health disorders (Russell & Fish, 2016 ) and 
substance abuse (Day et al., 2017 ) among sexual minority youths. This evidence for the existence 
of stigma related prejudices against the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender population has 
recently been shown to include asexual individuals (Lucassen et al., 2011 ; Yule et al., 2013 ). 
Because of this, the development of an asexual identity and the process of integrating or ‘inter -
nalising’ negative sentiments into one’s own self-concept is becoming an increasing focus of 
research.
During identity development, it is believed that an individual creates their self-image through 
experiences and associated meanings within their community (Jamil et al., 2009 ). However, as sexual 
minority youths are often raised within a predominantly heteronormative society, they do not 
necessarily encounter similar others and often lack an initial exposure to non-heterosexual commu -
nities (Rosario et al., 2006 ). As a result, they may gain an understanding of society’s negative regard 
towards a non-heterosexual identity and may experience a different developmental trajectory 
(Morgan, 2013 ). Like other sexual minority individuals, asexual individuals are believed to internalise 
their existence outside of heteronormative ideals and standard life events, which in turn, shapes their 
identity development (McInroy et al., 2020 ). Moreover, an increasing recognition of sex and sexual 
attraction as ‘natural’ and ‘necessary’ (Kennon, 2021 ) may further enhance the invisibility and 
oppression of asexual individuals. For example, ‘allonormativity’, or the assumption that that all 
people experience some form of sexual attraction, has been shown to hinder the development and 
management of asexual identities (Mollet, 2020 , 2021 ). Thus, there is a growing need to address and 
understand how an asexual identity is constructed within the context of both a heteronormative 
(Morgan, 2013 ) and allonormative society (Mollet, 2021 ).
The current review
For the purpose of the current review, asexual identity development will be conceptualised with 
reference to both non-heterosexual and asexual identity development models. This will encom -
pass components of identity development such identity confusion and an awareness of the self as 
different; discovering asexuality and sources of information; the role of the internet and asexuality- 
specific communities; identity acceptance and the integration of sexual and romantic identities; 48
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
and finally, disclosure of an asexual identity, education and reactions from others. Specifically, we 
will focus on empirical research that investigates identity development at both interpersonal and 
intrapersonal levels, as well as the societal and cultural factors that influence identity 
development.
This scoping review will bring together research which pertains to asexual identity development 
and internalisation, with an added focus on whether and how individuals internalise societal 
messages held towards their asexual identity. Moreover, this review will provide an insight into 
how individuals who identify as non-heterosexual and diverge from the dominant heterosexual 
culture and assumed developmental path develop their identities.
To ensure a comprehensive analysis of literature, the research questions directing this review are 
broad in nature and address the following topics:
●What empirical research, both published and unpublished, has been generated about the 
development of an asexual identity?
●What attitudes, values, beliefs and experiences specific to asexual individuals shape their self- 
concept and understanding of their asexual identity?
●What gaps are present within the literature and what is recommended for future progression 
within this area?
This investigation acts as a significant contribution to our understanding of the key concepts and 
common experiences underlying the internalisation and development of an asexual identity. 
Moreover, as the first literature review of its kind, it maps research designs and analytical procedures 
to direct future research agendas.
Methodology
Literature reviews utilising a scoping methodology are becoming increasingly prevalent (Moher 
et al., 2009 ), highlighting their success and capacity to bring together the research within an area. 
While there is currently no conclusive definition for a scoping review (Daudt et al., 2013 ), its main 
purpose is to provide an overview of a topic (Moher et al., 2015 ) through the syntheses of available 
grey and published literature (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005 ). A scoping review that is well executed, may 
make a substantial contribution to an area of research (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005 ) and is considered 
a rigorous form of literature review.
The broad nature of a scoping review allows for a more generalised research question and 
subsequent exploration of a wide range of associated literature (Moher et al., 2015 ). Therefore, this 
scoping review will allow for the inclusion of all relevant material without the limitations of 
specific methodological approaches or contexts, whether geographical, cultural or sex based. 
Moreover, scoping reviews endeavour to articulate what is currently known in an area, including 
in-depth investigation of key concepts (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005 ). This is particularly fitting 
considering our limited understanding of asexual identity development and the way in which 
asexual individuals internalise their divergence from expected life events and societal norms. This 
scoping review will include studies that use varying methodologies and analytical approaches to 
consider what may be deemed a successful research design when investigating asexual identity 
development and internalisation. Furthermore, scoping reviews aim to present evidence relevant 
to a topic irrespective of study quality (Tricco et al., 2016 ) and are considered useful when 
mapping an area of research that is novel and emerging. Finally, as scoping reviews present 
information though mainly narrative presentations (Peterson et al., 2017 ), this will enhance 
reporting of the area under investigation, which is mainly qualitative or mixed in design, with 
limited statistical information. This scoping review will grant the exploration of a breadth of 
literature, mapping evidence in an assessable and unrestricted way to inform future research 
(Tricco et al., 2016 ).PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 49
Although relatively novel in nature, investigation surrounding asexuality has developed consid -
erably over the past few decades and can be considered an emerging area of research. Specifically, 
research has focused on how individuals come to identify as asexual, navigate relationships and 
disclosure, seek support and integrate within the asexual community (Foster et al., 2019 ; Mollet, 
2020 , 2021 ; Robbins et al., 2016 ). This growth in research poses many theoretical and methodological 
challenges when studying the development of an asexual identity, such as inconsistent definitions, 
limited demographic information and restricted gathering of participants through asexuality-specific 
communities (Mollet, 2020 ). Thus, this review aims to map the diversity of research questions, 
methodologies, analytical approaches and theoretical orientations, to identify key concepts and 
knowledge gaps surrounding the development of an asexual identity. Moreover, as this research 
aims to extract and synthesise evidence surrounding asexual identity development and internalisa -
tion, the participants identified within each included study should maintain some understanding of 
themselves as asexual. Studies which include participants that do not engage in sexual activity (e.g. 
members of religious sects) and do not identify as asexual, will not be included for review.
Method
Objectives and research question
The objective of this scoping review is to provide an insight into the attitudes, values, beliefs and 
experiences that shape the identity development of asexual individuals, as well as how they 
internalise societal messages held towards asexuality. This will involve review of both quantitative 
and qualitative evidence, which will direct the scope of future enquiry into the area of asexuality. 
Review questions included within this research take inspiration from the review title and as such, 
advise the formation of inclusion criteria (Khalil et al., 2016 ).
Identifying relevant studies
Context
The context of literature reviewed does not require a specific geographical location, nor specified 
cultural, racial or sex-based factors. The reviewed literature does not require a specific setting nor 
discipline. This review is concerned solely with the factors that contribute towards asexual identity 
development and internalisation.
Types of Participants
Studies which gather data from asexual individuals have been included. When defining asexuality, 
studies which used self-identification as asexual, behaviours indicative of asexuality (a lack of sexual 
behaviour) and those which defined asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction directed towards others 
were considered appropriate to include. However, regardless of how each study defined asexuality, it 
was imperative that the participants included had an awareness of the self as asexual and interpreted 
their experiences through this lens. A specific romantic identity, age or gender category were not 
deemed factors requiring exclusion.
Types of Studies
Both qualitative and quantitative research designs were included if written in English and published 
after 1 January 2000. This cut-off point was considered appropriate as empirical research into 
asexuality comes predominantly from after this date (Bogaert, 2004 ).50
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Outcomes of this review
This review maps literature surrounding asexual identity development and internalisation. 
Specifically, this review outlines the experiences, attitudes, values and beliefs common among 
asexuals, such as coming-out, reactions of others and how they make sense of their asexual 
identities. In addition to this, methodological frameworks for studying asexuality and suggestions 
for future methodological approaches are outlined. The findings of this scoping review will be useful 
in informing the design and implementation of proceeding studies in asexuality and specifically 
those which focus on identity development and internalisation.
Search procedure
A librarian specialising in behavioural and social science literature advised on appropriate search 
strategies and identified relevant bibliographic databases. Specific databases were searched to 
increase the likelihood of obtaining all relevant studies that fall within the scope of this review. 
This consisted of the databases EBSCO (Academic Search Complete, CINAHL Plus with Full Text, 
MEDLINE, APA PsycArticles, Psychology and Behavioural Sciences Collection, APA PsycInfo), Taylor 
and Francis, PubMed and Springer. In addition to this, grey literature searches were conducted using 
multiple search engines and databases.
Search strategy
This review consisted of an extensive database search with carefully selected search terms, followed 
by the application of strict inclusion/exclusion criteria. Papers were excluded from review if they did 
not concern an asexual population or did not focus upon the identity development or internalisation 
(i.e. attitudes, values, beliefs and experiences) of asexual individuals. Following multiple database 
searches, 29 papers were identified from which to extract and synthesise evidence (Figure 1). The 
inclusion/exclusion procedure was phased in several separate stages, including the identification of 
relevant articles, the screening of each article for inclusion or exclusion and an independent cross- 
check of included articles by authors. The order of search terms varied depending on each site but 
included the major themes of ‘asexuality’ or ‘asexual’, ‘beliefs’, ‘attitudes’, ‘experiences’, ‘identity’ and 
‘value’. This review of literature was conducted across multiple timelines to ensure that the most 
recently published articles in the area were included in the final analysis.
1 January 2000–1 May 2019 : A total of 294 papers were imported to the citation manager EndNote 
to allow for appropriate organisation of papers and to assist in the removal of duplicates. Following 
an initial removal of duplicates, 277 papers remained – it is important to note that this process did 
not immediately remove all duplicates and thus, further removal of duplicates was carried out later in 
the screening of papers. Using a checklist created prior to the screening process, author (SK) and 
a trained research assistant (XS) screened the remaining papers to determine eligibility. Most papers 
were excluded based on their title/abstracts. Following initial screening, 129 references were 
removed. The most common reasons for removal included that papers (a) were not empirical or 
were purely theoretical in nature, (b) did not examine asexual identity development (e.g. presenta -
tion of purely demographic information), or (c) concerned members of other non-heterosexual 
communities without separate presentation of results pertaining to asexual participants. A second 
screening resulted in the removal of an additional 127 papers. These papers were removed as they 
did not investigate the attitudes, values, beliefs or experiences associated with asexual identity 
development or internalisation. Through a second removal of duplicates, five more papers were 
removed, resulting in a total of 16 papers included for extraction and review.
1 May 2019–31 March 2020 : An additional review of literature was conducted with the same search 
terms and databases as the original search. Forty papers were imported to EndNote, with the removal 
of three duplicates. Upon initial screening of titles and abstracts, 32 papers were removed as they were PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 51
not empirical in nature or did not examine the attitudes, values, beliefs or experiences associated with 
asexual individuals. Following an additional screening, one more paper was removed for the reasons 
outlined above. This resulted in a total of four papers to be included in the data extraction process.
1 January 2000–1 July 2021 : A final review of literature was carried out with the same databases as 
the original search. Search terms were expanded to include ‘asexuality’ or ‘asexual’ and ‘identity 
development’ or ‘identity formation’ or ‘identity construction’. This yielded 356 papers. Following an 
initial screening, 328 papers were removed as they were either duplicated, did not meet inclusion 
criteria, or had already been reviewed in prior searches. The remaining 28 papers underwent content 
analysis carried out by authors MM and SK. Following content analysis, 17 papers were removed as 
15 did not meet inclusion criteria and two were not available to the authors. This resulted in a total of 
11 papers from this search to be included in the data extraction process.
Data extraction process
When combined, a total of 31 papers gathered from the database searches were included in the data 
extraction process. A data extraction spreadsheet was designed to gather all relevant information 
from the papers included for review. This detailed author names, location and year of publication, 
the method of investigation and analysis, study design and sample characteristics (sample size, age, 
gender, relationship status). The major themes produced within each study were listed within this 
extraction process (see Appendix A). All authors examined the documents and extracted information 
simultaneously. MM reviewed this process throughout. As this scoping review aims to garner 
information surrounding our current knowledge of asexual identity development and internalisa -
tion, the above categories were considered in a flexible manner. During the data extraction process, 
a further six papers were removed on the grounds that they did not explore the attitudes, values, 
experiences, or beliefs specific to the development of an asexual identity. This resulted in 25 
empirical papers being included in this scoping review.
Search strategy: grey literature
Several databases and search engines were utilised during the grey literature search. Unlike the 
database search, a specific timeline was not identified. SK conducted several trials to determine 
search-engines that were most appropriate to retrieve and rank results that aligned with this scoping 
review. This resulted in the use of search engines dedicated to web-based resources such Google 
Search, DuckDuckGo and Dogpile. The first 100 results retrieved from each search-engine were 
considered for review. Dissertations and theses were searched using Ethos by British Library, dart 
Europe E-Thesis Portal, and repositories such as OpenGrey, Oaister/Worldcat, Core and Base. 
Conference proceedings were obtained through Web of Science and Research Gate. Search strategies 
remained consistent across resources and were derived from terms used in the bibliographic search. 
The order of search terms varied depending on each site but included the major themes of ‘asexuality’ 
or ‘asexual’, ‘beliefs’, ‘attitudes’, ‘experiences’, ‘identity’ and ‘value’. There was a considerable overlap 
between resources and many results had already appeared in the bibliographic search. Dissertations, 
theses and conference proceedings were excluded from review if they did not concern components of 
asexual identity development and internalisation. Four articles were selected for data extraction.
Methodological quality
As this scoping review is exploratory in nature with an overarching aim to provide further informa -
tion on asexual identity development and internalisation, an assessment of methodological quality 
was not performed. This allowed for the inclusion of all available literature in the area. Unlike 
systematic reviews, scoping reviews do not necessarily assess the quality of literature (Khalil et al., 
2016 ).52
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Analysing the data
Results were reviewed by authors SK and MM. The research team identified, coded and charted 
relevant units of text from the articles as outlined by (Tricco et al., 2016 ) with a focus on findings that 
pertained to elements of asexual identity development and/or internalisation.
Results
A total of twenty-nine articles were included for review. Key details from each article were charted 
and summarised to include author information, year of publication, sample information, study 
design and main findings (see Table A1). Although a variety of methodologies were utilised across 
studies, the majority were qualitative in design and analysis (N = 23), with some quantitative (N = 3) 
or mixed design (N = 3). Mixed-methods or quantitative studies performed mainly descriptive 
analyses of the attitudes and characteristics associated with an asexual population and charted 
demographic information. The method of analysis implemented across qualitative studies were 
mainly phenomenological, grounded theory and ethnographic. The most common rationale given 
for this choice of qualitative methodology was a desire to examine asexual individuals’ personal 
perceptions of an event or experience. The prevalence of this choice of methodology coincides 
with the overarching aim of this scoping review which is also concerned with the accounts or 
sense-making processes of asexual individuals. Articles were produced predominantly within 
Western societies, particularly the United States and the United Kingdom. When identifying 
asexual participants within research, most studies (N = 27) used self-identification as an opera -
tional definition for asexuality. Several studies maintained the assumption that when recruiting 
through resources such as AVEN, participants should understand asexuality as ‘a lack of sexual 
desire/attraction’ and therefore, participants who self-identified as asexual were included in the 
research. One study used the ‘Asexual Identification Scale’ (AIS) when recruiting participants and 
another used a combination of self-identification as asexual and participant description of asexu -
ality as ‘not experiencing sexual attraction’. As most studies utilised self-identification as 
a definition for asexuality, a comparison of findings based on differing definitions for asexuality 
was not possible.
Figure 1. Flow diagram illustrating literature search and selection.PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 53
When analysed thematically, eight themes were generated to represent key findings across 
literature. These themes were identified as the following:
●Understanding Asexuality
●Coming to an Asexual Identity
●Stigmatisation and the Need to Educate
●Isolation and Invisibility
●Disclosure
●Individual Differences
●Negotiating Relationships
●Conservative Sexual Beliefs and Religion
Understanding asexuality
Existing literature emphasises how asexuality is understood by asexuals and the implications 
that this may have when making sense of an asexual identity. Research suggests that asexuals 
understand asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction that is independent of romantic attraction 
and often discovered through engagement with asexual communities and online forums.
Asexuality is understood predominantly within the asexual community as a lack of sexual 
attraction directed towards others (Andersson, 2010 ; Brotto et al., 2010 ; Scherrer, 2008 ). An 
example of this can be seen in research conducted by Brotto et al. (2010 ), in which asexual 
participants described alternative motives for relationships and non-sexual forms of attraction. 
Similarly, Maxwell (2017 ) found that while asexuality may be connected to multiple forms of 
attraction, such attractions are based upon non-sexual desires, predominantly romantic with 
a focus on intellectual intimacy. Further examples of this can be seen within research con-
ducted by Mitchell & Hunnicutt (2019 ) and Van Houdenhove et al. (2015 ), in which asexual 
participants note their ability to consider others as ‘aesthetically pleasing’ without sexual 
attraction.
Moreover, evidence suggests that sex and romance are perceived as two very separate 
constructs of desire within the asexual community. For example, attitudes towards romance do 
not differ significantly between asexual and allosexual participants. An example of this is seen 
within Bulmer & Izuma's (2018 ) comparison of asexual and allosexual participants’ attitudes 
towards sex and romance. This research shows that while asexual participants typically display 
more negative attitudes towards sex, they do not differ significantly from allosexuals in terms 
of their implicit attitudes towards romance. Similarly, research suggests that asexual women are 
more open towards romance and romantic attraction without an element of sexual desire 
(Foster et al., 2019 ). This understanding of romantic and sexual desire as different is seen 
throughout the literature and appears key in forming participants’ understanding of their 
asexual identities.
Finally, imperative to understanding one’s asexuality is a sense of community gained when 
identifying as asexual. Research suggests that a sense of difference associated with discovering an 
asexual identity may be subdued by the concept of an asexual community or asexuality-specific 
support groups (Carrigan, 2011 ; Mollet, 2020 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Savage, 2019 ; Vares, 2021 ). For example, 
a shared sense of community and exposure to others’ accounts of asexuality has been shown to 
allow participants to move beyond individualised self-questioning and assists in the understanding 
of their asexual identity (Carrigan, 2011 ; MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ; Mollet, 2020 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Savage, 
2019 ; Van Houdenhove et al., 2015 ).54
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Coming to an asexual identity
Much of the literature emphasises components of coming to an asexual identity, including an 
awareness of the self as different and feelings of otherness within a sexualised society. For example, 
feelings of disparity when comparing the self with peers, is a common experience among asexuals, 
and for many, marks the beginning of their asexual identity (Andersson, 2010 ; Foster et al., 2019 ; 
Mollet, 2020 ; Savage, 2019 ). Moreover, this sense of difference may result in feelings of otherness and 
self-questioning among asexuals (Brotto et al., 2010 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Van Houdenhove et al., 2015 ) and 
may initiate the process of discovering an asexual identity (Carrigan, 2011 ). However, research 
suggests that coming to an asexual identity may be a nuanced or ‘fluid’ process, that is subject to 
varying experiences and sub-identities (Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 ). For example, culture, gender 
expectations and religious ideologies (Foster et al., 2019 ; MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ; Mollet, 2021 ) 
have been shown to hinder the recognition of many participants’ asexuality and their ability to 
express themselves as asexual. Moreover, within their proposed model of asexual identity develop -
ment Robbins et al., (2016 ), acknowledge that awareness of one’s asexual identity does not follow 
a linear progression and is subject to varying experiences and sub-identities.
The internet appears to play a large role when discovering and making sense of an asexual 
identity. For example, the internet and social media outlets act as a source of information among 
asexuals (Andersson, 2010 ; Foster et al., 2019 ; McInroy et al., 2020 ; Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 ; Mollet, 
2020 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Savage, 2019 ) and have been shown to assist in the validation of an asexual 
experience as well as the coming out process (Robbins et al., 2016 ). Specifically, asexual participants 
have identified AVEN as a particularly useful source of information, both for their own validation, as 
well as a source of reference for friends and family members (Robbins et al., 2016 ).
Imperative to coming to an asexual identity is the ability to embrace one’s sexuality and to adopt 
this as part of the self. Current literature conveys a sense of ‘embracing’ asexuality upon discovering 
its existence (Foster et al., 2019 ; Robbins et al., 2016 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Van Houdenhove et al., 2015 ). 
Moreover, literature suggests a sense of ‘relief’ when learning about asexuality and adopting an 
asexual identity (Andersson, 2010 ; Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 ; Mollet, 2020 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Vares, 2021 ).
Stigmatisation and the need to educate
Stigmatisation and the dismissal of asexuality is witnessed throughout literature. This stigmatisation 
appears to be a typical experience among participants and is considered by many to stem from the 
imposition of sexuality within society. These experiences of stigmatisation and a general lack of 
information surrounding asexuality brings forth a sense of obligation to educate others on 
asexuality.
Foster et al. (2019 ) reported the social rejection of participants’ asexuality through allosexuals’ 
assumptions that their lack of sexual interest is due to mental illness or childhood trauma. Such 
findings have been reproduced across literature, whereby asexuality lacks credibility within sex-
ualised cultures (MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ; Mollet, 2020 ; Robbins et al., 2016 ), and asexuals are 
often advised to seek medical or psychological explanations/treatments for their lack of sexual 
desire (Gupta, 2017 ). Participants have described others’ consideration of asexuality as a ‘phase’ 
(Carrigan, 2011 ) ‘mental or medical condition’, or as a result of an abusive relationship (Mitchell & 
Hunnicutt, 2019 ; Mollet, 2020 , 2021 ). These experiences of stigmatisation appear to stem from 
a lack of information and the imposition of sexuality by society (Foster et al., 2019 ). Moreover, the 
presence of microaggressions and divergence from sexual and romantic expectations has brought 
many asexuals to experience ‘shame’ surrounding their lack of sexual attraction (Deutsch, 2018 ; 
Vares, 2021 , p. 7) and a sense of the self as different or incomplete (Savage, 2019 ). For example, 
many asexual participants have been shown to adopt a negative understanding of asexuality and 
attribute their lack of sexual attraction to conditions such as Asperger’s Syndrome and problematic 
childhood experiences (Andersson, 2010 ). Again, these findings are considered to evolve as PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 55
a negative result of ‘compulsory sexuality’ in which being sexual, irrespective of sexual identity, is 
favoured over ‘non-sexualness’ or asexuality (Gupta, 2015 ). According to the reviewed literature, 
the sources of this stigma may include family, friends, religious institutions and medical profes -
sionals, some members of non-heterosexual communities and the sexualisation of media and 
advertising (Deutsch, 2018 ; Gupta, 2017 ; Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 ; Robbins et al., 2016 ; Rossi, 
2017 ; Savage, 2019 ).
Research suggests that experiences of stigmatisation have led to a ‘strong desire among asexuals’ 
to educate others on the existence of asexuality (Brotto et al., 2010 ). This sense of obligation to 
inform others about asexuality stems from a need to destigmatise and address misconceptions 
(Brotto et al., 2010 ; Savage, 2019 ), increase visibility (Gupta, 2017 ; Mollet, 2021 ; Rossi, 2017 ) and 
legitimise asexuality (Scherrer, 2008 ). Findings from Gupta (2017 ), indicate a motivation for political/ 
social change stemming predominantly from experiences of marginalisation and subsequent 
engagement in outreach activities and visibility work. This was also seen within research conducted 
by Mollet (2020 , 2021 ), in which many asexuals considered their roles in volunteer efforts and 
educational initiatives as a responsibility and felt compelled to enhance information surrounding 
asexuality. Moreover, many asexuals express the need for increased research surrounding asexuality, 
to enhance self-identification and legitimate sources of information (Brotto et al., 2010 ; Rossi, 2017 ; 
Savage, 2019 ). Taken together, these findings indicate a common experience of stigmatisation that is 
resisted through a shared obligation to educate others and promote an awareness of asexuality as 
a legitimate sexual identity.
Isolation and invisibility
Current literature suggests a common experience of invisibility and social isolation among asexual 
individuals. This invisibility of asexuality appears to stem predominantly from sexualised cultures and 
allonormativity. For example, Vares (2021 , p. 7), reported that representations of the heteronorma -
tive ideal, such as ‘the happy family’ are considered ‘inescapable’ by some asexual participants, with 
limited offline contact and few groups available for support. Such findings appear consistent across 
literature, with many participants reporting a lack of social credibility, denial, and invisibility of 
asexuality (MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ; Mollet, 2020 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Rothblum et al., 2019 ; Savage, 2019 ; 
Vares, 2018 ). This consideration of asexuality as invisible appears as a source of ‘angst’ for some 
individuals (Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 , p. 518), making it harder for them to come out (Dawson et al., 
2016 ). Moreover, allonormativity has been shown to influence asexual individuals’ identity manage -
ment in multiple ways and contributes towards invisibility, invalidity, and the erasure of asexuals 
(Mollet, 2021 ). When examining the role of allonormativity within higher education, Mollet (2020 , 
2021 ), found that many asexual participants internalised allonormative ideals and questioned their 
asexuality. This sense of doubt surrounding participants’ asexual identities was reinforced by lack of 
exposure to asexuality and perpetuated a sense of isolation (Mollet, 2020 ). Moreover, this sense of 
isolation and invisibility is reinforced by the sexualisation of media and advertising, as well as the 
power of sex within marketing and the communication of sexual relationships as ‘normal’ (Gupta, 
2017 ; Mollet, 2021 ; Rothblum et al., 2019 ; Savage, 2019 ; Vares, 2021 ). Interestingly, while participants 
attributed this social anonymity to a lack of awareness of asexuality, some also considered this as 
a result of disguising their asexuality (Mollet, 2020 , 2021 ) or the ability to ‘fake being sexual’ (Mitchell 
& Hunnicutt, 2019 , p. 518).
Disclosure
According to current literature, there are several factors influencing an individual’s willingness to 
disclose their asexual identity. Such factors range from a desire to increase awareness of asexuality, 
to apprehension surrounding a fear of dismissal and alienation. Moreover, research suggests that 
reactions towards participants’ disclosure is related to others’ awareness of asexuality.56
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Findings from Mitchell and Hunnicutt (2019 ) reveal that while selective in the disclosure of their 
asexual identities, participants felt that coming-out was necessary to increase awareness of asexu -
ality. Research suggests that many asexual individuals consider disclosure as ‘necessary’ to increase 
visibility of asexuality (Foster et al., 2019 , p. 132; Robbins et al., 2016 ), and for some, is an opportunity 
to no longer hide their lack of sexual attraction (Rossi, 2017 ). Despite this, evidence suggests that 
coming out is a selective process within the asexual community (Foster et al., 2019 ; Robbins et al., 
2016 ), with many asexuals considering disclosure as ‘unnecessary irrespective of circumstances’ 
(Mollet, 2021 ). For example, Robbins et al. (2016 ) found that some asexual participants engaged in 
an internal process of identity acceptance and felt that coming out was not salient to their identities. 
Moreover, they noted that many participants considered disclosure as relevant only within romantic 
relationships or when addressing questions surrounding dating and finding a partner (Robbins et al., 
2016 ).
Research suggests that many asexuals fear disclosure due to invisibility and denial within 
sexualised cultures (Rossi, 2017 ; Savage, 2019 ). This apprehensiveness surrounding disclosure report -
edly stems from a fear of stigmatisation (Robbins et al., 2016 ) and invisibility of asexuality (Foster 
et al., 2019 ; MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ). For example, dismissal, expected or experienced, from 
friends, family and potential partners (Jolene Sloan, 2015 ; Mollet, 2021 ; Rossi, 2017 ; Vares, 2018 ), as 
well as others’ assumption of sexual pathology, has been shown to hinder the coming out process 
(McInroy et al., 2020 ; Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 ; Mollet, 2020 , 2021 ; Rothblum et al., 2020 ). 
According to Mollet (2020 ), this denial or ‘erasure’ of asexuality perpetuates invisibility and con-
tributes towards asexual individuals’ beliefs that others are unwilling to accept or recognise their 
asexual identities. Moreover, many asexual participants have recalled experiences of erasure when 
disclosing their asexual identities to members of non-heterosexual communities and associated 
organisations (Mollet, 2020 , 2021 ; Savage, 2019 ). Again, this dismissal appears to stem from allo-
normativity and negative assumptions held by some members of non-heterosexual communities 
and has caused many asexual individuals to refrain from sharing their identities within these spaces 
(Mollet, 2021 ).
Despite these concerns surrounding disclosure, support and acceptance from others is also seen 
throughout the reviewed literature. Findings from Robbins et al. (2016 ) indicated positive reactions 
towards disclosure that were related to an increased understanding and awareness of asexuality. 
Moreover, despite the existence of fear surrounding disclosure, Rothblum et al. (2020 ) reported an 
availability of social support that did not differ significantly from the experiences of other sexual 
minorities. Such experiences of support and understanding are also seen in research conducted by 
Mitchell and Hunnicutt (2019 ), in which some participants report acceptance and understanding 
when coming out to family and friends.
Individual differences
While the asexual community holds many commonalities, research suggests that there are a diverse 
range of attitudes and sub-identities that act to distinguish asexual individuals. This can be seen 
through the presence of both romantic and aromantic identities, varying attitudes towards sex and 
relationships, and differing sentiments regarding the significance of asexuality to one’s self-concept. 
An example of such diversity can be seen within research conducted by Carrigan (2011 ) and Rossi 
(2017 ), in which participants presented varying attitudes towards sex, such as ‘sex positive’, ‘sex- 
neutral’, ‘sex-averse’ and ‘anti-sex’. Additionally, research indicates the presence of ‘demi-sexuals’, 
whereby participants experience sexual attraction based on romantic desire (Carrigan, 2011 ), or 
intermittent sexual attraction while still identifying as asexual (Foster et al., 2019 ).
Romantic and aromantic identities are also shown to exist within the asexual community (Bulmer 
& Izuma, 2018 ; Scherrer, 2008 ). Distinctions between the two typically appear when describing an 
‘ideal relationship’, with aromantic asexuals often considering this as ‘friendship like’ and romantic 
asexuals describing some level of physical intimacy and a preference for monogamy (Carrigan, 2011 ; PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 57
Scherrer, 2008 , p. 623). Moreover, when investigating sexual attraction and behaviour among 
asexual individuals, McInroy et al. (2020 ) found that over half of self-identified asexual participants 
(N = 711) had experienced some form of sexual and/or romantic attraction. This corresponds with the 
concept that asexuality is diverse, with varying levels of attraction and differing experiences of sexual 
and romantic relationships. The presence of diverse sexual and romantic identities has previously 
been interpreted through the ‘split attraction model’ (SAM), whereby sexual and romantic attraction 
are considered separate constructs that can occur independently of one another (Przybyło, 2022 ). 
This model, which encompasses additional forms of attraction such as aesthetic, sensual, platonic, 
emotional and intellectual attraction, has been considered useful when understanding the nuances 
that underlie asexual and (a)romantic identities (Carroll, 2020 ; Przybyło, 2022 ; Winer et al., 2022 ). 
Despite this, the SAM has recently received conjecture from some individuals within the asexual 
community, as many feel it conflates attraction and orientation models (Coyote., 2019a , 2019b ). As 
such, it may be more appropriate to consider this model as a guide to understanding the distinctions 
that underly asexual identities and position it within broader terms such as ‘differentiated attraction/ 
orientation’ (Sennkestra., 2020 ). This may remove the assumption that the SAM is a single coherent 
model that is unvarying across asexual communities and may grant greater flexibility and versatility 
in asexual individuals’ use of labels when referring to their romantic and sexual identities.
The literature also indicates that asexual individuals differ in their experience of being asexual and 
the value that they place on their asexual identity. An example of this can be seen within research 
conducted by Dawson et al. (2016 ), where many participants described the coming out process as 
important, while others considered it socially unnecessary with no pragmatic purpose. Moreover, 
several participants recounted a ‘Eureka’ moment when first discovering the term asexual, while 
others considered this euphoria as short lived and quickly moved on following discovery (Dawson 
et al., 2019 , p. 16).
Negotiating relationships
Existing research emphasises how asexual individuals negotiate and understand intimate relation -
ships. This includes the negotiation of intimate boundaries, loyalties and partnerships; the motiva -
tions to engage in a relationship; and doubts surrounding the feasibility of an intimate relationship 
with an allosexual partner.
The process of negotiating sexual boundaries and the resulting arrangements held between 
asexuals and allosexual partners is documented across literature. This can be seen through asexual 
participants’ willingness to engage in some form of sexual activity with an allosexual partner (Gupta, 
2017 ; Haefner, 2011 ; Jolene Sloan, 2015 ), and consideration of sex as a compromise within relation -
ships (Foster et al., 2019 ; Mollet, 2020 ). Interestingly, research suggests that BDSM communities 
allow some asexuals the opportunity to find partners and engage in intimate activities that do not 
rely on sexual desire (Jolene Sloan, 2015 ; Vares, 2018 ; Winter-Gray & Hayfield, 2021 ). Moreover, many 
asexuals report engaging in open relationships to maintain partnerships with allosexuals (Gupta, 
2017 ; Van Houdenhove et al., 2015 ), and consider infidelity as romantic rather than sexual engage -
ment with others (Brotto et al., 2010 ). Despite this, research also suggests that some asexuals engage 
in consensual sex due to societal pressures (Gupta, 2017 ), feel unable to communicate their 
asexuality or come to an agreement with their partners (Dawson et al., 2019 ; Savage, 2019 ).
Asexual participants describe several motivations for engaging in relationships with both asexual 
and allosexual partners. These motivations appear to stem from a desire to gain intellectual intimacy 
(Maxwell, 2017 ; Van Houdenhove et al., 2015 ), achieve long-term monogamy and a traditional family 
structure (Vares, 2018 , 2021 ), and for some, adhere to cultural expectations and gender role expres -
sions (Foster et al., 2019 ). However, research also suggests a sense of doubt surrounding the 
perceived possibility of a relationship. For example, many asexuals question the practicality of 
a sexless relationship (Van Houdenhove et al., 2015 ) and describe an inactive approach to finding 
a partner due to these perceived difficulties (Maxwell, 2017 ; Vares, 2018 , 2021 ). Moreover, many 58
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
asexuals consider their chances of finding a partner as ‘low’ and often dismiss non-sexual closeness 
in friendships due to a fear of ‘something more’ (Dawson et al., 2019 , pp. 11–14). Interestingly, some 
asexuals considered a relationship with another asexual individual as unlikely due to a lack of 
accessibility (Vares, 2018 ).
Conservative sexual beliefs and religion
The evidence that surrounds asexual participants’ religious beliefs and conservative views is sparse 
and conflicting at times. Such discrepancies can be seen through varying reports of religiosity, as well 
as differing levels of conservative sexual beliefs across studies. For example, while Kurowicka and 
Przybylo (2020 ) suggest that many asexuals use Catholic discourse to explain their asexuality, Brotto 
et al. (2010 ) and Rothblum et al. (2019 ), found a higher proportion of atheism within their samples. 
Moreover, while Kurowicka and Przybylo (2020 ) found Catholicism to be significant point of refer -
ence among asexuals, Brotto et al. (2010 ), found that asexuality was more often related to non- 
conformist ideals, as well as an objection to religious values. In addition to this, Carvalho et al. (2017 ), 
reported the presence of more sexually conservative beliefs among asexuals, although this is yet to 
be addressed within future research.
Discussion
This scoping review presents several important findings about the attitudes, beliefs, values and 
experiences that underpin asexual identity development, as well as the process of internalising 
societal messages held towards asexuality. An analysis of the available literature has generated a list 
of provisory themes that describe components of asexual identity development and provides 
a unique contribution to our current knowledge of asexuality. The themes identified within this 
review appear consistently throughout literature highlighting their relevance and importance when 
investigating asexual identity development and internalisation. Moreover, features of identity devel -
opment presented within this research correspond with existing theoretical models of both non- 
heterosexual and asexual identity development. It must be noted that the themes presented within 
this research are not prescriptive of asexual identity development and do not account for the varied 
experiences, sub-identities or genders present within the asexual population.
Theoretical implications and suggestions for future research
The articles included in this review were mainly qualitative in design and produced largely descrip -
tive accounts of the experiences, attitudes and beliefs that may shape asexual identity development 
and internalisation. The reoccurring use of qualitative methods within the reviewed literature 
corresponds with an overarching aim to gain insights into the thoughts and feelings of participants 
(Austin & Sutton, 2014 ), as well as current attempts to broaden our understanding of asexual 
identities and experiences associated with asexuality (Mollet & Lackman, 2018 ). Moreover, summar -
ising the available qualitative research grants an additional layer to the value of this scoping review 
and may be used to inform the design and implementation of future quantitative enquiries.
Existing literature emphasises the key events and sense-making processes that underlie asexual 
identity development and internalisation, such as coming-out, the reactions of others and how 
asexuals interpret their lack of sexual attraction. Evidence suggests that asexual individuals typically 
understand asexuality as a lack of sexual attraction that is independent of romantic attraction and 
often recognise their asexuality through exposure to asexual communities. Identification as asexual 
appears to follow a common trajectory that is initiated through self-questioning and confirmed 
through online supports such as AVEN. Moreover, these findings are indicative of the term asexuality 
as hidden and not commonly recognised prior to exposure to online resources. The literature also 
presents a common experience of stigmatisation and social dismissal of one’s sexual identity. This PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 59
fear of dismissal and a lack of awareness from others appears to impact participants’ willingness to 
disclose their asexual identities and reinforces a desire to educate others and increase awareness of 
asexuality. Finally, the literature suggests alternative motivations to engage in romantic relation -
ships, as well as asexual individuals’ concerns that underly intimacy and loyalties within partnerships. 
Despite such commonalities, research also presents a diverse range of attitudes and identities 
present within the asexual community. This is witnessed through the existence of diverse romantic 
(e.g. aromantic, biromantic, heteroromantic and homoromantic) and sexual (e.g. asexual, demi- 
sexual and grey-asexual) identities, as well as varying levels of significance placed on one’s asexual 
identity. Moreover, there was a diverse range of ages and genders (e.g. male, female, transgender, 
agender and genderqueer) reported within the reviewed literature.
The role of heteronormativity and compulsory sexuality
Heteronormativity and ‘compulsory sexuality’ appeared as key concepts underpinning the research 
area of asexuality and specifically, literature surrounding the experiences, attitudes, beliefs and 
values of asexual individuals. Heteronormativity can be considered to relate to the promotion of 
heterosexuality as a societally preferred sexual identity, whereas compulsory sexuality pertains to 
‘the common assumption that everyone is defined by some type of sexual attraction’ (Emens, 2014 , 
p. 303). Although the influence of these concepts was seen predominantly within literature inves -
tigating asexual individuals’ experiences of stigmatisation, isolation and invisibility, they were 
evident throughout all themes listed within this scoping review. Moreover, there appeared to be 
consistent evidence for allosexuals’ negative sentiments held towards asexuality and the impact that 
this has on asexual individuals’ identity development and internalisation.
Throughout the reviewed literature, there was repeated reference to allosexuals’ dismissal of 
asexuality as some form of physical or psychological disorder. This is consistent with the values of 
heteronormativity (Robertson, 2014 ) and allonormativity and thus, may lead to more a distressing 
sexual questioning process (Boyer & Lorenz, 2020 ). The influence of these heteronormative and 
allonormative ideals was apparent within literature through feelings of stigmatisation and alienation 
and appeared to instil a negative understanding of asexuality among some asexual participants. 
Isolation and ‘erasure’ also appeared as recurring sentiments throughout literature, as asexual indivi -
duals reported a sense of difference from their peers (Brotto et al., 2010 ; Carrigan, 2011 ; Foster et al., 
2019 ; Mollet, 2020 , 2021 ). Moreover, a common experience of invisibility reported within the literature 
corresponds with the pressures of compulsory sexuality and how this may hinder the recognition of 
an asexual identity among asexual individuals (Winer et al., 2022 ). It was apparent that many 
participants internalised this sense of difference surrounding their asexuality and as a result, were 
seen to doubt or question their asexual identities. This is reminiscent of past literature surrounding the 
influence of heteronormativity and how this may exclude and marginalise non-heterosexual indivi -
duals (Rich, 1980 ). Moreover, these findings may be likened to research surrounding other sexual 
minority identities in which isolation and a sense of difference may lead to a greater risk for 
psychological damage (Sullivan & Wodarski, 2002 ). Future research should consider the impact that 
stigmatisation, isolation and dismissal may have on asexual individuals’ wellbeing, granting greater 
insight into the problems that they may face when coming to an asexual identity. It is apparent that 
the imposition of sexual norms within society may negatively impact asexual individuals’ cohesive 
sense of identity (MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ) and thus, further investigation is required to better 
understand asexual individuals’ experiences of overcoming both heteronormative and allonormative 
ideals (Winer et al., 2022 ). While there is much evidence surrounding asexuals’ experiences of 
stigmatisation and marginalisation, the impact of minority stress and the influence that this may 
have on their well-being is yet to be comprehensively investigated. According to Friedman (1999 ), 
stigmatisation and prejudice directed at a minority group can result in a stressful environment that 
may lead to physical and/or mental health problems. Interestingly, this minority stress can be linked to 
concealment of sexual identity (Meyer, 2003 ) and has been shown to have far-reaching health 60
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
implications for lesbian and gay people (Guschlbauer et al., 2019 ). As this scoping review has identified 
reports of stigmatisation within the asexual population, future research should consider how this is 
internalised by asexuals and the implications that this may have on their wellbeing. This may grant 
insight into the challenges faced by asexuals, as well as the resources available to counter stigmatisa -
tion and prejudice.
Asexual Identity Development
The themes present within this scoping review relate closely to stages of non-heterosexual identity 
development (Cass, 1979 ) and elements specific to asexual identity development (Robbins et al., 
2016 ). Throughout literature, there is consistent evidence of how asexual individuals come to 
discover, understand and identify with asexuality, as well as the processes surrounding the disclosure 
of their asexual identity. Cass’s (1979 ) initial stages of ‘Identity Confusion’ and ‘Identity Comparison’ 
are evident within the literature as a consideration of the self as different from peers marks the 
beginning of an individual’s asexual identity. Moreover, repeated reports of self-questioning, patho -
logising and subsequent searching is consistent with the components unique to asexual identity 
development. The third and fourth stages of Cass’s model, ‘Identity Acceptance’ and ‘Identity Pride’, 
are seen within the literature through varying reports of asexual individuals’ embracing their 
asexuality and gaining a sense of asexual community. Specifically, online resources and asexual 
communities are shown to assist in the development of an asexual identity and correspond with 
current understanding of asexual identity development. According to Harper et al. (2016 ), online 
communities assist in developing non-heterosexual identities by providing a safe space of recogni -
tion and self-acceptance. As seen throughout the reviewed literature, these online spaces allow 
asexual individuals to develop their sense of identity within a larger community. Moreover, the 
asexual community acts to ameliorate feelings of marginalisation and isolation deriving from 
heteronormativity and allonormativity, which as a result fosters a positive self-concept and identity 
among asexual individuals. Finally, disclosure of an asexual identity and a need to educate others on 
asexuality appears repeatedly throughout literature, further highlighting its applicability within the 
development of an asexual identity.
Despite the relevance of themes presented within this scoping review to the stages 
identified within non-heterosexual identity development models, there are several instances 
which portray asexual identity development as a non-linear process. For example, much of 
the literature suggests that developing and maintaining an asexual identity may be 
a nuanced or fluid process that is subject to varying experiences and sub-identities 
(Mitchell & Hunnicutt, 2019 ; Robbins et al., 2016 ). This is seen within the literature as visibility, 
culture, gender expectations and religious ideologies are shown to hinder the recognition of 
many participants’ asexuality and their ability to express themselves as asexual (Foster et al., 
2019 ; MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ; Mollet, 2021 ). As a result, findings from this scoping review 
confirm a growing awareness of the multifaceted nature of asexual identity development 
(Winer et al., 2022 ).
Further research is required to establish the process of asexual identity development, as well as 
the factors contributing to how asexual individuals internalise their lack of sexual attraction. This may 
include investigation into the multifaceted nature of asexual identities and how they interact to 
shape asexual identity development. Moreover, future research should consider how asexual identity 
development coincides with and differs from that of other sexual minority identities. This will provide 
greater insight into the unique attitudes, beliefs, values and experiences that contribute towards 
asexual identity development. Finally, as many asexual individuals report discoveries through online 
forums, future research should investigate the influence of online support and its role in amending 
this sense of difference.PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 61
Relationships and theories of love
When considering asexual individuals’ motivations to engage in interpersonal partner relationships, 
much of the literature indicates a desire to gain intellectual or emotional intimacy without sexual 
desire (Maxwell, 2017 ; Van Houdenhove et al., 2015 ; Vares, 2018 , 2021 ). These findings may be 
interpreted through Sternberg’s (1986 ) Triangular Theory of Love, whereby love comprises of three 
independent components namely, ‘intimacy’, ‘passion’ and ‘decision/commitment’. According to 
Sternberg (1986 , 1997 ), these components are motivational needs that are present in varying 
degrees within relationships and can combine to form varying ‘love styles’. Of relevance are the 
parts intimacy’ and ‘commitment’ in which Sternberg (1986 ) theorised that an individual can 
experience closeness, connectedness and ‘bondedness’ towards a partner without the presence of 
‘passion’ or what is interpreted as sexual desire. This notion that intimate emotions can be felt 
without sexual desire, may tie in with asexuals’ motivations to engage in interpersonal partner 
relationships, while also providing a useful framework for better understanding their experiences 
within these relationships. As such, the findings present within this review may act as an argument 
for the Sternberg model in that different forms of love are possible such as commitment and 
intimacy without the presence of sexual desire.
Moreover, conformity and the influence of sexual normativity also appear as factors contributing 
to asexual individuals’ desire to engage in a partner relationship. Although asexuals’ experience of 
sex is investigated within the current literature, conformity and the influence of sexual normativity is 
yet to be expanded upon. While this review does identify the influence of societal pressures (Gupta, 
2017 ) and a desire to maintain relationships (Foster et al., 2019 ), there is a need to further investigate 
asexuals’ reasons for having sex and the implications that this may have on their understanding of 
their asexual identity. Thus, future research should examine the presence of these emotion-based 
incentives and how they may align with Sternberg’s model of love.
The asexual community as heterogeneous
Studies typically reported a diverse range of ages, romantic orientations and genders within their 
participant pools. This reinforces an awareness of the asexual community as heterogeneous (Brotto & 
Yule, 2017 ), and corresponds with previous findings surrounding its widespread diversity (Weis et al., 
2017 ). Moreover, this demonstrates the diverse nature of asexual identity development and how the 
integration of gender and sexuality within a heteronormative society may account for variability within 
asexual individuals’ experiences (Cuthbert, 2019 ). This is seen within the reviewed literature as partici -
pants’ departure from societally expected gender roles and sexual norms threatened their positive self- 
perceptions and subsequent identity development (MacNeela & Murphy, 2015 ). Moreover, gender 
appears to play a fundamental role within asexual individuals’ experiences of dating and relationships, 
as well as allosexuals’ reactions towards the disclosure of their asexual identities. For example, female 
asexuals’ lack of sexual attraction may be dismissed as sexual passivity (Vares, 2018 ) with some allosexuals 
considering them to ‘tease’ or ‘lead on’ their partners (Haefner, 2011 ). Conversely, sexual desire is 
considered inherent to male participants’ gender identity, with some allosexuals disbelieving their lack 
of sexual drive and questioning their masculinity (Vares, 2018 ). Thus, the employment of heteronormative 
feminine and masculine sexuality, as well as allonormativity, may contribute towards the denial of asexual 
individuals’ lack of sexual attraction in ways that are specific to their preferred gender identity.
Considering the diverse nature of the asexual community, future research should examine the 
influence of varying sub-identities on asexual identity development. This may include the intersec -
tion of queer identities (e.g. transgender and gender non-conforming people) and asexuality, as well 
as the role of racism, sexism and ableism within asexual identity development (Foster et al., 2019 ). 
This may allow greater inclusivity within research and grant insight into the complexity of asexual 
participants’ experiences (Antonsen et al., 2020 ; Foster et al., 2019 ).62
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Limitations
The generalisability of themes produced within this review is limited due to the nature of the 
participant pools involved. As most studies gained participants through online communities and 
asexuality specific platforms, this may not represent the experiences of asexuals who are not 
exposed to online forums. Thus, this brings forth the need to investigate the identity development 
and internalisation of asexual individuals that are not recruited through asexuality specific platforms 
or communities.
Moreover, there were several limitations surrounding the methodology of this scoping review. 
Firstly, the search strategy excluded studies published in a language other than English, leaving open 
the possibility of important national and/or cultural differences. Secondly, as scoping reviews do not 
require a quality assessment of literature (Arksey & O’Malley, 2005 ), our reporting of these results 
may be subjective in nature. Finally, as our understanding of asexuality and the language used to 
describe asexual identities continues to evolve, the search terms used within this study may have led 
to the exclusion of some published literature. This is particularly relevant to research published 
earlier within the area of asexuality.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agencies in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Notes on contributors
Sinéad Kelleher is a PhD candidate and Head Tutor of the BA (Hons) Applied Psychology programme and BA (Hons) 
Psychology and Computing programme in University College Cork, Ireland. Her research interests include human 
sexuality, developmental psychology, social psychology, and psychometrics.
Mike Murphy is a Lecturer in Applied Psychology, and Research Coordinator of the Doctoral Programme in Clinical 
Psychology, in University College Cork, Ireland. His research interests include human sexuality, social support, and 
positive & coaching psychology.
Xin Su is a recent graduate in Applied Psychology, University College Cork, Ireland. His research interests include health 
and wellbeing in the context of social identity.
ORCID
Mike Murphy 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8379-3813
References
Anderson, S. M. (2020 ). Gender Matters: The perceived role of gender expression in discrimination against cisgender and 
transgender LGBQ individuals. Psychology of Women Quarterly , 44(3), 323–341. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0361684320929354 
Andersson, K. (2010 ). We have a name for something I’ve felt all my life. Lund University. http://www. lunduniversity. lu. 
se/lup/publication/1615944 .
Antonsen, A. N., Zdaniuk, B., Yule, M., & Brotto, L. A. (2020 ). Ace and Aro: Understanding differences in romantic 
attractions among persons identifying as asexual. Archives of Sexual Behavior , 49(5), 1615–1630. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s10508-019-01600-1 
Arksey, H., & O’Malley, L. (2005 ). Scoping studies: Towards a methodological framework. International Journal of Social 
Research Methodology , 8(1), 19–32. https://doi.org/10.1080/1364557032000119616 PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 63
Arnett, J. J. (2007 ). Emerging adulthood: What is it, and what is it good for? Child Development Perspectives , 1(2), 68–73. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2007.00016.x 
Austin, Z., & Sutton, J. (2014 ). Qualitative research: Getting started. The Canadian Journal of Hospital Pharmacy , 67(6), 
436–440. https://doi.org/10.4212/cjhp.v67i6.1406 
Bogaert, A. F. (2004 ). Asexuality: Prevalence and associated factors in a national probability sample. The Journal of Sex 
Research , 41(3), 279–287. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224490409552235 
Bogaert, A. F. (2006 ). Toward a conceptual understanding of asexuality. Review of General Psychology , 10(3), 241–250. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.10.3.241 
Boyer, S. J., & Lorenz, T. K. (2020 ). The impact of heteronormative ideals imposition on sexual orientation questioning 
distress. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity , 7(1), 91–100. doi:10.1037/sgd0000352 .
Brotto, L. A., Knudson, G., Inskip, J., Rhodes, K., & Erskine, Y. (2010 ). asexuality: A mixed-methods approach. Archives of 
Sexual Behavior , 39(3), 599–618. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-008-9434-x 
Brotto, L. A., & Yule, M. (2017 ). Asexuality: Sexual orientation, paraphilia, sexual dysfunction, or none of the above? 
Archives of Sexual Behavior , 46(3), 619–627. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-016-0802-7 
Bulmer, M., & Izuma, K. (2018 ). Implicit and explicit attitudes toward sex and romance in asexuals. The Journal of Sex 
Research , 55(8), 962–974. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2017.1303438 
Carrigan, M. (2011 ). There’s more to life than sex? Difference and commonality within the asexual community. 
Sexualities , 14(4), 462–478. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460711406462 
Carroll, M. (2020 ). What can asexuality offer sociology? Insights from the 2017 Asexual Community Census Preprint. 
SocArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/bh7t3 
Carvalho, J., Lemos, D., & Nobre, P. J. (2017 ). Psychological features and sexual beliefs characterizing self-labeled asexual 
individuals. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy , 43(6), 517–528. https://doi.org/10.1080/0092623X.2016.1208696 
Cass, V. C. (1979 ). Homosexual identity formation: A theoretical model. Journal of Homosexuality , 4(3), 219–235. https:// 
doi.org/10.1300/J082v04n03_01 
Chasin, C. D. (2015 ). Making sense in and of the asexual community: Navigating relationships and identities in a context 
of resistance: Making sense of asexuality. Journal of Community & Applied Social Psychology , 25(2), 167–180. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/casp.2203 
Coyote. (2019a , March 15). Romantic Orientation and the “Split Attraction Model” are not the same thing . The Ace Theist . 
https://theacetheist.wordpress.com/2019/03/14/romantic-orientation-and-the-split-attraction-model-are-not-the- 
same-thing/ 
Coyote. (2019b , March 20). Remodeling: On the Reclamation of the Term “Split Attraction Model” . The Ace Theist . https:// 
theacetheist.wordpress.com/2019/03/20/remodeling-on-the-reclamation-of-the-term-split-attraction-model/ 
Craig, S. L., Iacono, G., Paceley, M. S., Dentato, M. P., & Boyle, K. E. H. (2017 ). Intersecting sexual, gender, and professional 
identities among social work students: The importance of identity integration. Journal of Social Work Education , 53(3), 
466–479. https://doi.org/10.1080/10437797.2016.1272516 
Cuthbert, K. (2019 ). “When we talk about gender we talk about sex”: (A)sexuality and (A)gendered subjectivities. Gender 
& Society , 33(6), 841–864. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243219867916 
Daudt, H. M., van Mossel, C., & Scott, S. J. (2013 ). Enhancing the scoping study methodology: A large, inter-professional 
team’s experience with Arksey and O’Malley’s framework. BMC Medical Research Methodology , 13(1), 48. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/1471-2288-13-48 
Dawson, M., McDonnell, L., & Scott, S. (2016 ). Negotiating the boundaries of intimacy: The personal lives of asexual 
people. The Sociological Review , 64(2), 349–365. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-954X.12362 
Dawson, M., Scott, S., & Mcdonnell, L. (2019 ). Freedom and foreclosure: Intimate consequences for asexual identities. 
Families, Relationships and Societies , 8(1), 7–22. https://doi.org/10.1332/204674317X15011694317558 
Day, J. K., Fish, J. N., Perez-Brumer, A., Hatzenbuehler, M. L., & Russell, S. T. (2017 ). Transgender youth substance use 
disparities: Results from a population-based sample. Journal of Adolescent Health , 61(6), 729–735. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.jadohealth.2017.06.024 
DeLuzio Chasin, C. (2011 ). Theoretical issues in the study of asexuality. Archives of Sexual Behavior , 40(4), 713–723. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-011-9757-x 
Deutsch, T. (2018 ). Asexual People’s Experience with Microaggressions M.A. City University of New York John Jay College of 
Criminal Justice. https://www.proquest.com/docview/2076398300/abstract/3BFF0BCEC7A44132PQ/1 
Di Giacomo, E., Krausz, M., Colmegna, F., Aspesi, F., & Clerici, M. (2018 ). Estimating the risk of attempted suicide among 
sexual minority youths: A systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatrics , 172(12), 1145. https://doi.org/10. 
1001/jamapediatrics.2018.2731 
Dillon, F. R., Worthington, R. L., & Moradi, B. (2011 ). Sexual identity as a universal process. In S. J. Schwartz, K. Luyckx, & 
V. L. Vignoles (Eds.), Handbook of Identity Theory and Research (pp. 649–670). Springer New York. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/978-1-4419-7988-9_27 
Emens, E. F. (2014 ). Compulsory Sexuality. Stanford Law Review , 66(2) , 303–386. https://www.proquest.com/scholarly- 
journals/compulsory-sexuality/docview/1507220830/se-2?accountid=14504 .64
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Foster, A. B., Eklund, A., Brewster, M. E., Walker, A. D., & Candon, E. (2019 ). Personal agency disavowed: Identity 
construction in asexual women of color. Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity , 6(2), 127–137. 
doi:10.1037/sgd0000310 .
Friedman, R. C. (1999 ). Homosexuality, psychopathology, and suicidality. Archives of General Psychiatry , 56(10), 887–888. 
https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.56.10.887 
Gupta, K. (2015 ). Compulsory sexuality: Evaluating an emerging concept. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society , 
41(1), 131–154. https://doi.org/10.1086/681774 
Gupta, K. (2017 ). “And now i’m just different, but there’s nothing actually wrong with me”: Asexual Marginalization and 
resistance. Journal of Homosexuality , 64(8), 991–1013. https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2016.1236590 
Guschlbauer, A., Smith, N. G., DeStefano, J., & Soltis, D. E. (2019 ). Minority stress and emotional intimacy among 
individuals in lesbian and gay couples: Implications for relationship satisfaction and health. Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships , 36(3), 855–878. https://doi.org/10.1177/0265407517746787 
Haefner, C. (2011 ) (). Asexual scripts: A grounded theory inquiry into the intrapsychic scripts asexuals use to negotiate 
romantic relationships . Institute of Transpersonal Psychology. https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/asex 
ual-scripts-grounded-theory-inquiry-into/docview/875157958/se-2 
Hammack, P. L., Frost, D. M., & Hughes, S. D. (2019 ). Queer intimacies: A new paradigm for the study of relationship 
diversity. The Journal of Sex Research , 56(4–5), 556–592. https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2018.1531281 
Harper, G. W., Serrano, P. A., Bruce, D., & Bauermeister, J. A. (2016 ). The internet’s multiple roles in facilitating the sexual 
orientation identity development of gay and bisexual male adolescents. American Journal of Men’s Health , 10(5), 359– 
376. doi:10.1177/1557988314566227 .
Jamil, O. B., Harper, G. W., & Fernandez, M. I., & Adolescent Trials Network for HIV/AIDS Interventions. (2009 ). Sexual and 
ethnic identity development among gay–bisexual–questioning (GBQ) male ethnic minority adolescents. Cultural 
Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology , 15(3), 203–214 doi:10.1037/a0014795 .
Jolene Sloan, L. (2015 ). Ace of (BDSM) clubs: Building asexual relationships through BDSM practice. Sexualities , 18(5–6), 
548–563. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460714550907 
Keniston, K. (1968 ). Psychoanalysis and Theories of Man: Identity: Youth and Crisis . In E. H. Erikson (Editors.), $2.95. Science 
(pp. 336). Norton. Cloth, $6.95; paper, 161(3838), 257–258 https://doi.org/10.1126/science.161.3838.257 
Kennon, P. (2021 ). Asexuality and the potential of young adult literature for disrupting allonormativity. The International 
Journal of Young Adult Literature , 2(1), 1 doi:10.24877/ijyal.41 .
Khalil, H., Peters, M., Godfrey, C. M., McInerney, P., Soares, C. B., & Parker, D. (2016 ). An evidence-based approach to 
scoping reviews: EBP approach to scoping reviews. Worldviews on Evidence-Based Nursing , 13(2), 118–123. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/wvn.12144 
Kietzer, C. (2015 ). Development of self identity as lesbian, gay, bisexual, trangender. Adlerian Counseling and 
Psychotherapy. United States of America Adler Graduate School 2015 , 56.
Kroger, J. (2015 ). Identity development through adulthood: The move toward “wholeness. In McLean, Kate C., Syed, 
Moin (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Identity Development (pp. 65–80). Oxford University Press.
Kurowicka, A., & Przybylo, E. (2020 ). Polish asexualities: Catholic religiosity and asexual online activisms in Poland. In 
R. Buyantueva & M. Shevtsova (Eds.), LGBTQ+ Activism in Central and Eastern Europe (pp. 289–311). Springer 
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20401-3_12 
Laumann, E. O., Gagnon, J. H., Michael, R. T., & Michaels, S. (2000 ). The Social Organization of Sexuality: Sexual Practices in 
the United States . University of Chicago Press. https://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/S/bo3626005. 
html 
Lucassen, M. F. G., Merry, S. N., Robinson, E. M., Denny, S., Clark, T., Ameratunga, S., Crengle, S., & Rossen, F. V. (2011 ). 
Sexual attraction, depression, self-harm, suicidality and help-seeking behaviour in New Zealand secondary school 
students. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry , 45(5), 376–383. https://doi.org/10.3109/00048674.2011. 
559635 
MacInnis, C. C., & Hodson, G. (2012 ). Intergroup bias toward “Group X”: Evidence of prejudice, dehumanization, 
avoidance, and discrimination against asexuals. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations , 15(6), 725–743. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1368430212442419 
MacNeela, P., & Murphy, A. (2015 ). Freedom, invisibility, and community: A qualitative study of self-identification with 
asexuality. Archives of Sexual Behavior , 44(3), 799–812. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-014-0458-0 
Marcia, J. E. (1987 ). The identity status approach to the study of ego identity development. In Honess, T., Yardley, K. 
(Eds.), Self and identity: Perspectives across the lifespan (pp. 161–171). Routledge.
Maxwell, D. (2017 ). It’s not just about sex: Asexual identity and intimate relationship practices [Phd, University of York]. 
https://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/18006/ 
Mayer, K. H., Garofalo, R., & Makadon, H. J. (2014 ). Promoting the successful development of sexual and gender minority 
youths. American Journal of Public Health , 104(6), 976–981. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2014.301876 
McAdams, D. P., & McLean, K. C. (2013 ). Narrative identity. Current Directions in Psychological Science , 22(3), 233–238. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721413475622 PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 65
McInroy, L. B., Beaujolais, B., Leung, V. W. Y., Craig, S. L., Eaton, A. D., & Austin, A. (2020 ). Comparing asexual and 
non-asexual sexual minority adolescents and young adults: Stressors, suicidality and mental and behavioural health 
risk outcomes. Psychology & Sexuality , 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/19419899.2020.1806103 
McLean, K. C., Syed, M., Fivush, R., & Zaman, W. (2015 ). Gendered Narrative Voices. In K. C. McLean & M. Syed (Eds.), The 
Oxford Handbook of Identity Development . (pp. 33-52). Oxford University Press . https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/ 
9780199936564.013.003 
McLean, K. C., Syed, M., McAdams, D. P., & Zapata-Gietl, C. (2015 ). Three Strands of Identity Development Across the 
Human Life Course. In K. C. McLean & M. Syed (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Identity Development . (pp. 81-94). Oxford 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199936564.013.006 
Meyer, I. H. (2003 ). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: Conceptual 
issues and research evidence. Psychological Bulletin , 129(5), 674–697 doi:10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674 .
Misra, G. (2007 ). Construction of self: A cross-cultural perspective . Mindscapes, Bangalore, India. 32–44.
Mitchell, H., & Hunnicutt, G. (2019 ). Challenging Accepted Scripts of Sexual “Normality”: Asexual Narratives of Non- 
normative Identity and Experience. Sexuality & Culture , 23(2), 507–524. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12119-018-9567-6 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G., & The PRISMA Group. (2009 ). preferred reporting items for systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA Statement. PLoS Medicine , 6(7), e1000097. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. 
pmed.1000097 
Moher, D., Stewart, L., & Shekelle, P. All in the family: Systematic reviews, rapid reviews, scoping reviews, realist reviews, 
and more. (2015 ). Systematic Reviews , 4(1), s13643-015-0163–0167. 183. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-015-0163-7 
Mollet, A. L. (2020 ). “I have a lot of feelings, just none in the genitalia region”: A grounded theory of asexual college 
students’ identity journeys. Journal of College Student Development , 61(2), 189–206. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2020. 
0017 
Mollet, A. L. (2021 ). “It’s easier just to say I’m queer”: Asexual college students’ strategic identity management. Journal of 
Diversity in Higher Education . https://doi.org/10.1037/dhe0000210 
Mollet, A. L., & Lackman, B. R. (2018 ). Asexual borderlands: Asexual collegians’ reflections on inclusion under the LGBTQ 
umbrella. Journal of College Student Development , 59(5), 623–628. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2018.0058 
Morgan, E. M. (2013 ). Contemporary issues in sexual orientation and identity development in emerging adulthood. 
Emerging Adulthood , 1(1), 52–66. https://doi.org/10.1177/2167696812469187 
Peterson, J., Pearce, P. F., Ferguson, L. A., & Langford, C. A. (2017 ). Understanding scoping reviews: Definition, purpose, 
and process. Journal of the American Association of Nurse Practitioners , 29(1), 12–16. https://doi.org/10.1002/2327- 
6924.12380 
Poston, D., & Baumle, A. (2010 ). Patterns of asexuality in the United States. Demographic Research , 23, 509–530. https:// 
doi.org/10.4054/DemRes.2010.23.18 
Prause, N., & Graham, C. A. (2007 ). Asexuality: Classification and characterization. Archives of Sexual Behavior , 36(3), 
341–356. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-006-9142-3 
Przybyło, E. (2022 ). Ace and aro lesbian art and theory with Agnes Martin and Yayoi Kusama. Journal of Lesbian Studies , 
26(1), 89–112. https://doi.org/10.1080/10894160.2021.1958732 
Rich, A. (1980 ). Compulsory heterosexuality and lesbian existence. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society , 5(4), 
631–660. https://doi.org/10.1086/493756 
Robbins, N. K., Low, K. G., & Query, A. N. (2016 ). A Qualitative exploration of the “coming out” process for asexual 
individuals. Archives of Sexual Behavior , 45(3), 751–760. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-015-0561-x 
Robertson, M. A. (2014 ). “How do I know I am gay?”: Understanding sexual orientation, identity and behavior among 
adolescents in an LGBT youth center. Sexuality & Culture , 18(2), 385–404. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12119-013-9203-4 
Rosario, M., Schrimshaw, E. W., Hunter, J., & Braun, L. (2006 ). Sexual identity development among lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual youths: Consistency and change over time. Journal of Sex Research , 43(1), 46–58. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00224490609552298 
Rossi, J. (2017 ). Passing When Asexual: Methods for Appearing Straight . 24. Mckendree.edu
Rothblum, E. D., Heimann, K., & Carpenter, K. (2019 ). The lives of asexual individuals outside of sexual and romantic 
relationships: Education, occupation, religion and community. Psychology & Sexuality , 10(1), 83–93. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/19419899.2018.1552186 
Rothblum, E. D., Krueger, E. A., Kittle, K. R., & Meyer, I. H. (2020 ). Asexual and non-asexual respondents from a U.S. 
Population-based study of sexual minorities. Archives of Sexual Behavior , 49(2), 757–767. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10508-019-01485-0 
Russell, S. T., & Fish, J. N. (2016 ). Mental health in lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) youth. Annual Review of 
Clinical Psychology , 12(1), 465–487. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-021815-093153 
Savage, C. (2019 ). The impact of experiences of asexual students in four-year institutions of higher education [Thesis]. Texas 
Tech University. https://ttu-ir.tdl.org/handle/2346/85057 
Savin-Williams, R. C. (2011 ). Identity development among sexual-minority youth. In S. J. Schwartz, K. Luyckx, & 
V. L. Vignoles (Eds.), Handbook of Identity Theory and Research (pp. 671–689). Springer New York. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-1-4419-7988-9_28 66
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Savin-Williams, R. C., & Diamond, L. M. (2000 ). Sexual identity trajectories among sexual-minority youths: Gender 
comparisons. Archives of Sexual Behavior , 29(6), 607–627. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1002058505138 
Scherrer, K. S. (2008 ). Coming to an asexual identity: Negotiating identity, negotiating desire. Sexualities , 11(5), 621–641. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460708094269 
Sennkestra. (2020 , May 1). Differentiating Attraction/Orientations (Or, the “Split Attraction Model” by any other name is so 
much sweeter.) . NEXT STEP: CAKE . https://nextstepcake.wordpress.com/2020/04/30/naming-differentiating-attraction 
-orientations/ 
Sharma, S., & Sharma, M. (2010 ). Self, social identity and psychological well-being. Psychological Studies , 55(2), 118–136. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12646-010-0011-8 
Sternberg, R. J. (1986 ). A triangular theory of love. Psychological Review , 93(2), 119–135. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.93.2.119 .
Sternberg, R. J. (1997 ). Construct validation of a triangular love scale. European Journal of Social Psychology , 27(3), 
313–335. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-0992(199705)27:3<313::AID-EJSP824>3.0.CO;2-4 
Stryker, S. (1980 ). Symbolic Interactionism: A Social Structural Version—Sheldon Stryker—Google Books , Benjamin/ 
Cummings Publishing Company. https://books.google.ie/books/about/Symbolic_Interactionism.html?id=EX_ 
ZAAAAMAAJ&redir_esc=y 
Sullivan, M., & Wodarski, J. S. (2002 ). Social alienation in gay youth. Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment , 
5(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1300/J137v05n01_01 
Thoits, P. A. (2013 ). Self, identity, stress, and mental health. In C. S. Aneshensel, J. C. Phelan, & A. Bierman (Eds.), 
Handbook of the Sociology of Mental Health (pp. 357–377). Springer Netherlands. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007- 
4276-5_18 
Torkelson, J. (2012 ). A queer vision of emerging adulthood: Seeing sexuality in the transition to adulthood. Sexuality 
Research and Social Policy , 9(2), 132–142. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13178-011-0078-6 
Tricco, A. C., Lillie, E., Zarin, W., O’Brien, K., Colquhoun, H., Kastner, M., Levac, D., Ng, C., Sharpe, J. P., Wilson, K., Kenny, M., 
Warren, R., Wilson, C., Stelfox, H. T., & Straus, S. E. (2016 ). A scoping review on the conduct and reporting of scoping 
reviews. BMC Medical Research Methodology , 16(1), 15. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-016-0116-4 
Tsang, S. K. M., Hui, E. K. P., & Law, B. C. M. (2012 ). Positive identity as a positive youth development construct: 
A conceptual review. The Scientific World Journal , 2012 , 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1100/2012/529691 
Van Houdenhove, E., Gijs, L., T’Sjoen, G., & Enzlin, P. (2015 ). Stories about asexuality: A qualitative study on asexual 
women. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy , 41(3), 262–281. https://doi.org/10.1080/0092623X.2014.889053 
Vares, T. (2018 ). ‘My [asexuality] is playing hell with my dating life’: Romantic identified asexuals negotiate the dating 
game. Sexualities , 21(4), 520–536. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460717716400 
Vares, T. (2021 ). Asexuals negotiate the ‘onslaught of the heteronormative. Sexualities , 136346072199338. doi:10.1177/ 
1363460721993389 .
Vignoles, V. L., Schwartz, S. J., & Luyckx, K. (2011 ). Introduction: Toward an integrative view of identity. In S. J. Schwartz, 
K. Luyckx, & V. L. Vignoles (Eds.), Handbook of Identity Theory and Research (pp. 1–27). Springer New York. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-1-4419-7988-9_1 
Weis, R., Tomaskovic-Moore, S., Bauer, C., Miller, T. L., Adroit, M., & Baba, A. (2017 ). . 2017 and 2018 Asexual Community 
Survey Summary Report . AVEN, 95.
Winer, C., Carroll, M., Yang, Y., Linder, K., & Miles, B. (2022 ). “I Didn’t Know Ace Was a Thing”: Bisexuality and Pansexuality 
as Identity Pathways in Asexual Identity Formation. . https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/agnd8 
Winter-Gray, T., & Hayfield, N. (2021 ). ‘Can I be a kinky ace?’: How asexual people negotiate their experiences of kinks and 
fetishes. Psychology & Sexuality , 12(3), 163–179. https://doi.org/10.1080/19419899.2019.1679866 
Wright, E. R., & Perry, B. L. (2006 ). Sexual identity distress, social support, and the health of gay, lesbian, and bisexual 
youth. Journal of Homosexuality , 51(1), 81–110. https://doi.org/10.1300/J082v51n01_05 
Yule, M. A., Brotto, L. A., & Gorzalka, B. B. (2013 ). Mental health and interpersonal functioning in self-identified asexual 
men and women. Psychology and Sexuality , 4(2), 136–151. https://doi.org/10.1080/19419899.2013.774162PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 67
Appendix A
Table A1. Charted articles included in the scoping review.
No. Author Information Sample Information Research DesignRelevant 
Themes
1 Andersson (2010 ) 
Country = SwedenAge: not specified 
Gender: Female (N = 5), Male (N = 1) 
Sample Size = 6Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Combined 
Analysis of Content Analysis, 
Interviews and Observations 
Collection: InterviewComing to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Understanding 
Asexuality 
Stigmatisation 
and the 
Need to 
Educate
2 Brotto et al. (2010 ) 
Country = CanadaAge: Range = 20–57 
Gender: Male (N = 4), Female (N = 11) 
Sample Size = 15Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: 
Phenomenological Analysis 
Collection: Telephone InterviewUnderstanding 
Asexuality 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Negotiating 
Relationships
3 Bulmer and Izuma 
(2018 ) 
Country = United 
KingdomAge: Female (M = 21.11), Male 
(M = 21.82) 
Gender (Asexual Participants): Female 
(N = 14), Male (N = 3), Other (N = 1) 
Gender (Control): Female (N = 23), Male 
(N = 4) 
Sample Size = 45 (18 Asexuals, 27 
Controls)Study Design: Between Group 
Comparison 
Method of Analysis: Quantitative 
Collection: Online questionnaire and 
paper questionnaireUnderstanding 
Asexuality 
Individual 
Differences
4 Carrigan (2011 ) 
Country = United 
KingdomAge: Not Specified 
Gender: Not Specified 
Sample Size = Interviews (N = 8) online 
questionnaires (N = 130)Study Design: Qualitative & 
Quantitative Design 
Method of Analysis: Mixed Method 
Collection: Interviews & Online 
QuestionnaireUnderstanding 
Asexuality 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Individual 
Differences
5 Carvalho et al. 
(2017 ) 
Country = PortugalAge (Asexual Participants): Female 
(M = 22.7, SD = 4.8), Male (M = 22.4, 
SD = 4.1) 
Age (Control Participants): Female 
(M = 22.5, SD = 2.9), Male (M = 22.4, 
SD = 2.7) 
Gender (Asexual Participants): Female 
(N = 68), Male (N = 19) 
Gender (Control): Female (N = 58), Male 
(N = 19) 
Sample Size = 164 (91 Asexuals, 81 
Controls)Study Design: Quantitative Study 
Design Method of Analysis: 
Multivariate analyses of variance 
(MANOVAs) 
Collection: Online QuestionnairesConservative 
Sexual 
Beliefs and 
Religion
6 Dawson et al. (2019 ) 
Country = ScotlandAge: 76% < 29 years of age, 24% ≥ 
30 years of age. 
Gender: Not Specified 
Sample Size = 50Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Symbolic 
Interactionist Theory 
Collection: Diary Writing and 
Interview AccountsNegotiating 
Relationships
7 Deutsch (2018 ) 
Country = United 
StatesAge: (M = 22.27, SD = 2.24) 
Gender: Female (N = 11) 
Sample Size = 11Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Consensual 
Qualitative Analysis 
Collection: Semi-structured InterviewStigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate
(Continued )68
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Table A1. (Continued).
No. Author Information Sample Information Research DesignRelevant 
Themes
8 Foster et al. (2019 ) 
Country = United 
StatesAge: Range = 18–51 (M = 25.9, 
Median = 22.5, SD = 10.14) 
Gender: Female (N = 5), Bio-female 
(N = 1), Cis-female (N = 2), Cis-woman 
(N = 1), ‘Asexual’ (N = 1) 
Sample Size = 11Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design Method of Analysis: 
Consensual Qualitative Research 
Collection: Semi-structured InterviewsUnderstanding 
Asexuality 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Negotiating 
Relationships 
Disclosure 
Individual 
Differences
9 Gupta (2017 ) 
Country = United 
StatesAge: Range = 19–50 (M = 29, SD = 9.5) 
Gender: Female (70%), Male (23%), 
Trans woman (N = 1), Other (1) 
Sample Size = 30Study Design: Qualitative Research 
Design Method of Analysis: 
Qualitative Analysis 
Collection: In-depth semi structured 
interview (in-person and over 
phone)Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Individual 
Differences 
Isolation and 
Invisibility
10 Haefner 
Country = United 
StatesAge: Range = 18–55, 
18–21 (N = 29); 22–25 (N = 19); 26–30 
(N = 8); 31–35 (N = 4); 36; 40 (N = 0); 
41–45 (N = 1); 46–50 (N = 1); 51–55 
(N = 1) 
*One participant did not give their age 
Gender: F (N = 37), M (N = 12), Agender 
(N = 9), Gender Queer (N = 8), Other 
(N = 6), Pangender (N = 1), 
Transgender (N = 1) 
Sample Size = 64Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Grounded Theory 
Collection: Two online surveysNegotiating 
Relationships
11 Kurowicka and 
Przybylo (2020 ) 
Country = PolandAge: Not Specified 
Gender: Not Specified 
Sample Size: Not SpecifiedStudy Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Not Specified 
Collection: Analysis of Online Forums 
(Sieć Edukacji Aseksualnej or SEA – 
translated as the Asexual Education 
Network)Conservative 
Sexual Belief 
and Religion
12 MacNeela and 
Murphy (2015 ) 
Country = IrelandAge: Range = 18–58 (M = 26.10, 
SD = 9.96) 
Gender: Female (31), Male (15), Other 
(18) unspecified (2) 
Sample Size = 66Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design Method of Analysis: 
Thematic Analysis 
Collection: Open-ended Online 
QuestionnairesUnderstanding 
Asexuality 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Disclosure 
Isolation and 
Invisibility
13 Maxwell (2017 ) 
Country =  
United KingdomAge: < 30 (N = 22), ≤ 35 (N = 4), >35 
(N = 3) 
Gender: Female (N = 22), Male (N = 7), 
Agender (N = 2), Non-gender (N = 5), 
Demi-female (N = 2), Cisgender 
(N = 12), Androgynous (N = 1) 
Sample Size (completed surveys) = 68 
Sample Size (completed survey and 
interview) = 29Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Thematic Analysis 
Collection: Online Surveys and Online 
Interviews.Understanding 
Asexuality 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Negotiating 
Relationships
14 McInroy et al. (2020 ) 
Country = United 
States of America 
& CanadaAge: Range = 14–24, Mean = 17.43 
Gender: Non-binary (N = 306), Female 
(N = 214), Genderqueer (N = 169), 
Trans Man (N = 127), Male (N = 42), 
Trans Woman (N = 12), Two Spirit 
(N = 11), Other (N = 9) 
Sample Size: 711Study Design: Quantitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Quantitative 
Analysis, demographic analysis 
Collection: Online SurveyComing to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Disclosure 
Individual 
Differences
(Continued )PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 69
Table A1. (Continued).
No. Author Information Sample Information Research DesignRelevant 
Themes
15 Mitchell and 
Hunnicutt (2019 ) 
Country = United 
StatesAge: Not Specified 
Gender: Female (N = 6), Male (N = 2), 
M-questioning (N = 1), Agender 
(N = 1) 
Sample Size = 10Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design   
Method of Analysis: Qualitative – not 
specified 
Collection: Modified life story 
narrative approach with an open- 
ended interview processUnderstanding 
the Asexual 
Self 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Disclosure 
Isolation and 
Invisibility 
Individual 
Differences
16 Mollet (2020 ) 
Country = United 
States of AmericaAge: Not Specified 
Gender: Male, Transgender, Agender 
(N = 1); Cisgender Woman (N = 4); 
Agender, Transgender (N = 1); 
Agender, Transmasculine (N = 1); 
Genderqueer, Transgender (N = 1); 
Nonbinary (N = 2); Cisgender Man 
(N = 2) 
Sample Size = 12Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: Grounded Theory 
Collection: Open Interview (phase 1) 
and Focus Group (phase 2)Understanding 
Asexuality 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the 
Need to 
Educate 
Isolation and 
Invisibility 
Disclosure 
Negotiating 
Relationships
17 Mollet (2021 ) 
Country = United 
States of AmericaAge: Not Specified 
Gender: Male, Transgender, Agender 
(N = 1); Cisgender Woman (N = 4); 
Agender, Transgender (N = 1); 
Agender, Transmasculine (N = 1); 
Genderqueer, Transgender (N = 1); 
Nonbinary (N = 2); Cisgender Man 
(N = 2) 
Sample Size = 12Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: Grounded theory 
Collection: Open Interview (phase 1) 
and Focus Group (phase 2)Stigmatisation 
and the 
Need to 
Educate 
Isolation and 
Invisibility 
Disclosure
18 Robbins et al. (2016 ) 
Country: United 
StatesAge: Range = 18–25 (71%), 26–32 
(20%), 33 and over (8%) 
Gender: Female (69%), Male (16%), 
Unidentified (15%) Sample Size = 169Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Thematic Analysis 
Collection: Open-ended InterviewComing to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Disclosure
19 Rossi (2017 ) 
Country = United 
States of AmericaAge: Range = 20–45 
Gender: Female (N = 8) 
Sample Size = 8Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: Qualitative 
Analysis 
Collection: Interviews (skype, 
facetime and in-person)Understanding 
Asexuality 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Isolation and 
Invisibility 
Individual 
Differences 
Disclosure
(Continued )70
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
Table A1. (Continued).
No. Author Information Sample Information Research DesignRelevant 
Themes
20 Rothblum et al. 
(2019 ) 
Country = United 
States of AmericaAge: Range = 18–53 (M = 30, SD = 11.5) 
Gender: Non-binary (N = 3), Male (N = 3) 
Female (N = 21) 
Sample Size = 27Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: Thematic Analysis 
Collection: Telephone InterviewIsolation and 
Invisibility 
Conservative 
Sexual 
Beliefs and 
Religion
21 Rothblum et al. 
(2020 ) 
Country: United 
StatesAge: Range = 18–61 
91.19% (18–27) 
Gender: Female (27.74%), Male (0%), 
Gender-queer, non-binary (72.26%) 
Sample Size = 19Study Design: Quantitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: bivariate 
differences assessed between 
asexual and non-asexual sexual 
minorities 
Collection: Online QuestionnaireStigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Disclosure
22 Savage (2019 ) 
Country = United 
States of AmericaAge: Range = 18–28 
Gender: Not Specified 
Sample Size = 5Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: Qualitative 
Analysis (guided by Muted Group 
Theory and the Minority Stress 
Model) 
Collection: Semi-structured Interviews 
(in-person and online)Understanding 
Asexuality 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Isolation and 
Invisibility 
Disclosure 
Negotiating 
Relationships
23 Scherrer (2008 ) 
Country = United 
StatesAge: Range = 18–66 (M = 27.4, 
Median = 21) 
Gender: Female (N = 75), Male (N = 18), 
Transgender (N = 2), “not easily 
categorised” (N = 7) Sample 
Size = 102Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design   
Method of Analysis: Ethnography 
Collection: Online survey Understanding 
the Asexual 
Self 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Individual 
Differences
24 Dawson et al. (2016 ) 
Country = United 
KingdomAge: Range = Majority 18–29, otherwise 
not specified 
Gender: Not specified 
Sample Size (Biographical 
Interview) = 50 
Sample Size (two-week diaries) = 27Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Thematically 
analysed using software program 
NVivo10 
Collection: Biographical interview; 
two-week diariesStigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate 
Isolation and 
Invisibility 
Individual 
Differences
25 Jolene Sloan (2015 ) 
Country = United 
StatesAge: Range = 19–34 Gender: Female 
(N = 10), Male (N = 2), Transgender 
Woman (N = 2), Transgender Man 
(N = 1) 
Sample Size = 15Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Qualitative, not 
specified 
Collection: Interviews (in-person or 
via online messaging)Disclosure 
Negotiating 
Relationships
26 Van Houdenhove 
et al., (2015) 
Country = BelgiumAge: Range = 20–50 
20-30 (N = 4), 31–40 (N = 3), 41–50 
(N = 2)  
Gender: Female (N = 9)Sample Size = 9Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design   
Method of Analysis: Interpretative 
Phenomenological Analysis 
Collection: Semi-structured interviewsUnderstanding 
the Asexual 
Self 
Coming to an 
Asexual 
Identity 
Negotiating 
Relationships
27 Vares (2018 ) 
Country = New 
ZealandAge: Range = 18–60Gender: Male and 
Female Participants (not specified) 
Sample Size = 13Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design 
Method of Analysis: Thematic 
Discourse Analysis 
Collection: Interviews (in-person and 
over phone)Negotiating 
Relationships 
Disclosure 
Isolation and 
Invisibility
(Continued )PSYCHOLOGY & SEXUALITY
 71
Table A1. (Continued).
No. Author Information Sample Information Research DesignRelevant 
Themes
28 Vares (2021 ) 
Country = New 
ZealandAge: Range = 18–60 
Gender: Not Specified 
Sample Size = 15Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: Thematic Analysis 
Collection: Open-ended InterviewIsolation and 
Invisibility 
Negotiating 
Relationships 
Stigmatisation 
and the need 
to Educate
29 Winter-Gray and 
Hayfield (2021 ) 
Country = United 
KingdomAge: Range = 18–35 (M = 22) 
Gender: Female (N = 33), Transwomen 
(N = 2), Male (N = 5), Transman 
(N = 3), Agender (N = 3), Gender-fluid 
(N = 2) 
Sample Size = 48Study Design: Qualitative Study 
Design  
Method of Analysis: Thematic Analysis 
Collection: Online SurveyNegotiating 
Relationships72
 S. KELLEHER ET AL.
